Singular perturbations occur when a pole is introduced into the dynamics of a polynomial. In this paper, we consider the simplest possible case: start with the map z (cid:3)→ zn where n > 1 and then add a pole at the origin. For simplicity, we consider the case of maps of the form zn + λ/zn. We then describe some of the many ways Sierpinski curve Julia sets arise in this family. We also give a classiﬁcation of the dynamics on these sets and describe the intricate structure that occurs around the McMullen domain in the parameter plane for these maps. Finally, we discuss some of the major differences between the cases n = 2 and n > 2. 1 Introduction Our goal in this paper is to describe the behavior of singularly perturbed complex analytic dynamical systems. By a singular perturbation we mean the following. Sup- pose we have a complex analytic map F0 which, for simplicity, we will assume to be a polynomial of degree d. Consider the new map Fλ obtained by adding a pole at a ∈ C so that Fλ(z) = F0(z) + λ(z − a)m where λ ∈ C is a parameter. The map Fλ is a singular perturbation of F0 as soon as λ (cid:6)= 0 since the degree of the map changes from d to d + m. As a consequence, the dynamical behavior of Fλ is much richer than that of F0, although some portions of the dynamics of F0 persist depending upon the location of the pole a.

The reason for the interest in singular perturbations arises from Newton’s method. Suppose we are applying Newton’s method to ﬁnd the roots of a family of polyno- mials Pλ which has a multiple root at, say, the parameter λ = 0. For example, consider the especially simple case of Pλ(z) = z2 + λ. When λ = 0 this polynomial has a multiple root at 0 and the Newton iteration function is simply N0(z) = z/2. However, when λ (cid:6)= 0, the Newton iteration function becomes Nλ(z) = z2 − λ2z= z 2−λ 2z and we see that, as in the family Fλ, the degree jumps as we move away from λ = 0. In addition, instead of just having a globally attracting ﬁxed point at the origin, after the perturbation, the dynamical behavior of Nλ become much richer. For simplicity, in this paper, we will consider the simplest possible case where F0(z) = zn and n ≥ 2. So the dynamics of F0 are well understood. If |z| < 1, the orbit of z tends to the attracting ﬁxed point at the origin under iteration of F0. If |z| > 1, the orbit of z tends to ∞ which is also an attracting ﬁxed point for F0 in the Riemann sphere. On the circle |z| = 1, the map is well known to be chaotic; this set is the Julia set of F0, which will be deﬁned below. For most of this paper, the singularly perturbed family will be of the form Fλ(z) = zn + λzn where again n ≥ 2. So the attracting ﬁxed point at the origin is replaced by a pole, just as in the Newton’s method example above. We remark that we could equally well consider the case where the degree of perturbation is d (cid:6)= n, but the case d = n has some special symmetries that make this case easier to understand. The principal goal of this paper is to give a survey of some of the many recent results concerning the dynamical and parameter planes for the family Fλ. A sub- theme in this paper is to show that the case where n = 2 is quite different from the case where n > 2. Indeed, this lower degree family of maps turns out to have much more complicated dynamical behavior than the case where n > 2. Another subtheme is to describe some of the interesting topological spaces that arise as the Julia sets of the maps Fλ. 2 Preliminaries Consider the family of maps Fλ(z) = zn + λzn where n > 2. The Julia set of Fλ, denoted by J(Fλ), is deﬁned to be the set of points at which the family of iterates of Fλ fails to be a normal family in the sense of Montel. There are many other equivalent deﬁnitions of the Julia set. For example, the Julia set is the closure of the set of repelling periodic points of Fλ, and, in our special case, it is also the boundary of the set of points whose orbits escape to ∞. As a consequence, the Julia set is the set of points on which Fλ behaves chaotically, since arbitrarily close to any point in J(Fλ) there is both a repelling periodic point and a point whose orbit escapes to ∞. The complement of the Julia set is called the Fatou set. √ There are a number of critical points for Fλ. One critical point occurs at ∞, which is always a ﬁxed point. A second critical point occurs at the origin, which is mapped directly to ∞. A straightforward computation shows that there are 2n other critical points for Fλ given by cλ = λ1/2n. These are the free critical points for Fλ. Despite the fact that there are 2n free critical points, there are only two critical values given λ. However, there really is only one free critical orbit since, when n by vλ = ±2 is even, both of the critical values are mapped to the same point. When n is odd, the orbits of the two critical values behave symmetrically under the map z (cid:3)→ −z. Thus this family of maps, like the quadratic polynomial family, is a natural one-parameter family of maps. The parameter plane (the λ-plane) is then a record of the behavior of the free critical orbit, just as in the case of the Mandelbrot set. There are also 2n prepoles at the points pλ = ( − λ)1/2n, i.e., Fλ(pλ) = 0. Here is one reason why the case n = 2 is so different from the case n > 2. Consider the second iterate of the critical points. We compute λ(cλ) = 2nλn/2 + F2 1 2nλ(n/2)−1 . When n > 2, it follows that F2 iterate of cλ reduces to 4λ + 1/4, so F2 signiﬁcant will become clear in the next section. λ(cλ) → ∞ as λ → 0. But when n = 2, the second λ(cλ) → 1/4 as λ → 0. The reason this is Let Cλ be the circle given by |z| = |λ|1/2n. Note that Cλ contains all of the critical points and the prepoles. A straightforward computation shows that Fλ maps Cλ 2n to 1 onto the straight line connecting the two critical values. We call Cλ the critical circle and its image the critical line. This is not the case for the family zn + λ/zd with n (cid:6)= d, so this is one of the reasons why we deal only with the case n = d. One may also check that any other circle centered at the origin is mapped n to 1 onto an ellipse whose foci are ±vλ. Also, the straight ray connecting 0 to ∞ and passing through cλ (a critical ray) is mapped 2 to 1 onto the straight ray connecting either vλ or −vλ to ∞ and extending the critical line. Similarly, each straight ray connecting 0 to ∞ and passing through pλ (a prepole ray) is mapped 1 to 1 onto the straight line passing through the origin and perpendicular to the critical line. The maps Fλ have additional symmetries. Let ω be a primitive 2nth root of unity. Then we have that Fλ(ωz) = ωnFλ(z). Hence the orbits of points of the form ωjz λ(z) → ∞, then all behave “symmetrically” under iteration of Fλ. For example, if Fi λ(ωkz) also tends to ∞ for each k. If Fi Fi λ(z) tends to an attracting cycle, then so λ(ωkz). However, the cycles involved may be different depending on k and, does Fi indeed, they may even have different periods. Nonetheless, all points lying on this 16 R.L. Devaney set of attracting cycles are of the form ωjz0 for some z0 ∈ C. Another symmetry is given by the involution Hλ(z) = λ/z. Here we have Fλ(Hλ(z)) = Fλ(z). √ When |z| is large, the term λ/zn in the formula for Fλ is negligible, so Fλ(z) ≈ zn near ∞. Consequently, the point at ∞ is a superattracting ﬁxed point for Fλ and it is well known that Fλ is conjugate to z (cid:3)→ zn in a neighborhood of ∞, so we have an immediate basin of attraction Bλ at ∞. Since Fλ has a pole of order n at 0, there is an open neighborhood of 0 that is mapped n to 1 onto a neighborhood of ∞ in Bλ. If the entire basin of ∞ is disjoint from this neighborhood around the origin, then there is a open set about 0 that is mapped n to 1 onto Bλ, and this entire set is disjoint from Bλ. This set is called the trap door, since any orbit that eventually enters Bλ must do so by passing through the trap door. We denote the trap door by Tλ. Using the symmetry Fλ(ωz) = ωnFλ(z), it is straightforward to check that Bλ, Tλ, and J(Fλ) are all symmetric under z (cid:3)→ ωz. We say that these sets possess 2n-fold symmetry. In particular, since the critical points are arranged symmetrically about the origin, it follows that if one of the critical points lies in Bλ (resp., Tλ), then all of the critical points lie in Bλ (resp., Tλ). Also, the map Hλ interchanges Bλ and Tλ and preserves both the Julia and the Fatou set. For other components of the Fatou set, the symmetry situation is somewhat dif- ferent: either a component contains ωjz0 for a given z0 in the Fatou set and all j ∈ Z, or else such a component contains none of the ωjz0 with j (cid:6)= 0 mod 2n. See [1] for a proof of this fact. 3 The Escape Trichotomy For the well-studied family of quadratic maps Qc(z) = z2 + c with c a complex parameter there is the well known Fundamental Dichotomy: 1. If the orbit of the only free critical point 0 tends to ∞, then the Julia set of Qc is a Cantor set; 2. If the orbit of 0 does not tend to ∞, then the Julia set is a connected set. In this section we discuss a similar result for Fλ that we call the Escape Tri- chotomy. Unlike the family of quadratic maps Qc, there exist three different “ways” that the critical orbit for Fλ can tend to inﬁnity. If the critical orbit tends to inﬁnity, then all of the critical values must lie in either Bλ, Tλ, or some of preimages of Tλ. These three different possibilities lead to the three distinct types of Julia sets for Fλ that comprise the Escape Trichotomy. Theorem 1 (The Escape Trichotomy) Suppose n ≥ 2 and that the orbits of the free critical points of Fλ tend to ∞. Then: 1. If one of the critical values lies in Bλ, then J(Fλ) is a Cantor set and Fλ | J(Fλ) is a one-sided shift on 2n symbols. Otherwise, the preimage Tλ is disjoint from Bλ. Singular Perturbations of Complex Analytic Dynamical Systems 17 2. If one of the critical values lies in Tλ (cid:6)= Bλ, then J(Fλ) is a Cantor set of simple closed curves (quasicircles), all concentric about the origin. This case does not occur when n = 2. 3. If one of the critical values lies in a preimage of Bλ that is different from Tλ, then J(Fλ) is a Sierpinski curve. If the critical orbits never escape to ∞, then J(Fλ) is a connected set. Several Julia sets illustrating this trichotomy and drawn from the family where n = 4 are included in Fig. 1. A Sierpinski curve is a very interesting topological space. By deﬁnition, a Sierpinski curve is a planar set that is homeomorphic to the well-known Sierpinski a. λ = 0.23 b. λ = 0.04 Fig. 1 Some Julia sets for z4 + λ/z4: if λ = 0.23, J(Fλ) is a Cantor set; if λ = 0.0006, J(Fλ) is a Cantor set of circles; and if λ = 0.125i, J(Fλ) is a Sierpinski curve

c. λ = –0.12 18 R.L. Devaney carpet fractal. But a Sierpinski curve has an alternative topological characterization: any planar set that is compact, connected, locally connected, nowhere dense, and has the property that any two complementary domains are bounded by disjoint simple closed curves is known to be homeomorphic to the Sierpinski carpet [2]. Moreover, such a set is a universal planar set in the sense that it contains a homeomorphic copy of any compact, connected, one-dimensional subset of the plane. We remark that the second part of the Escape Trichotomy was ﬁrst proved by McMullen [3]. He showed that this result only holds if n > 2 and λ is sufﬁciently close to 0. Indeed, the critical values can never lie in Tλ when n = 2 for |λ| small since the image of vλ tends to 1/4 as λ → 0. When n > 2, the image of vλ tends ∞ as λ → 0. In Fig. 2, we show the λ plane in the case n = 4. The outer region in this image consists of λ-values for which J(Fλ) is a Cantor set and is called the Cantor locus. The central disk is the McMullen domain in which J(Fλ) is a Cantor set of simple closed curves. The region between these two sets is called the connectedness locus as the Julia sets are always connected when λ lies in this region. The other disks in the connectedness locus correspond to Sierpinski holes in which the corresponding

Julia sets are Sierpinski curves. Fig. 2 The parameter plane when n = 4 4 Proof of the Escape Trichotomy In this section we provide a rough sketch of the proof of the Escape Trichotomy

Theorem. First let vλ be one of the critical values of Fλ and assume vλ ∈ Bλ. So ±vλ both lie in Bλ. Let ±γ be two symmetric and disjoint curves lying in Bλ and connecting Singular Perturbations of Complex Analytic Dynamical Systems 19 ±vλ to ∞. Let μj be the 2n preimages of ±γ for j = 1, . . . ,2n. One checks easily that each μj lies in Bλ, extends from 0 to ∞, and contains a single critical point. Hence Bλ and Tλ are not disjoint. Let U be a neighborhood of ∞ that contains ±γ and is 2n-fold symmetric. We may choose U so that U meets each μj in a single arc. Let V = Hλ(U) where we may assume that U and V are disjoint. Then both U and V lie in Bλ as do the μj. So J(Fλ) lies in the complement of the union of U, V, and the μj, which is a collection of 2n simply connected sets, I1, . . . ,I2n. It follows easily that each of the Ij is mapped univalently onto a region that contains all of the Ik. Then standard techniques from complex dynamics show that the set of points whose orbits remain for all time in the union of the Ik is a Cantor set and the restriction of Fλ to this set is conjugate to the one-sided shift map on 2n symbols. This Cantor set is J(Fλ). −1 λ (Tλ). We claim that F For case 2, we have by assumption that Bλ and Tλ are disjoint open disks and all −1 λ (Tλ) is an open annulus A. of the critical points lie in F −1 To see this note that F λ (Tλ) cannot be a collection of 2n disjoint disks, for, in such a case, each of the disks would be mapped at least 2 to 1 onto Tλ. Therefore there would be at least 4n preimages of any point in Tλ, contradicting the fact that the degree of Fλ is 2n. Hence at least two of the preimages of Tλ must intersect. But then, by symmetry, all of these preimages must intersect so the preimage of Tλ is a single open connected set. But then the Riemann – Hurwitz formula implies that A must be an annulus that contains all of the critical points. Now A lies in the annular region that separates Bλ and Tλ and divides this region into two closed subannuli, Ain and Aout. Then Fλ takes each of these annuli as an n to 1 covering onto the entire complement of Bλ ∪ Tλ. This implies that there are a pair of subannuli that are mapped onto A, one of which lies in each of Ain and −j λ (Tλ) consists of 2j−1 open, disjoint the other in Aout. Continuing, one shows that F subannuli, each of which lies in the Fatou set. The complement of the union of all of these annuli (together with Bλ and Tλ) is then the Julia set which can be shown to be a Cantor set of simple closed curves. Incidentally, the above argument indicates why this case cannot happen when n = 2. Since Ain and Aout are each mapped as 2 to 1 coverings of the annulus C − {Bλ ∪ Tλ}, it follows that the modulus of each of these subannuli is exactly half of the modulus of the bigger annulus. This implies that there is no room in C − {Bλ ∪ Tλ} for any other sets, eliminating the possibility of the existence of A and further preimages of Tλ. So vλ cannot lie in Tλ when n = 2. We now describe the ﬁnal case of the Escape Trichotomy where the critical val- ues have orbits that eventually escape through the trap door, but the critical values themselves do not lie in Tλ. In this case the Julia set is a Sierpinski curve. To show this, we need to verify the ﬁve properties that characterize a Sierpinski curve. It turns out that four and a half of these preperties are trivial to show. First and second, since we are assuming that the critical orbit eventually enters the basin of ∞, we −j λ (Bλ). That is, J(Fλ) is C with countably have that the Julia set is given by C − ∪F many disjoint, simply connected, open sets removed. Hence J(Fλ) is compact and connected. Third, since J(Fλ) (cid:6)= C, it is known that J(Fλ) cannot contain any open sets, so J(Fλ) is nowhere dense. Fourth, since the critical orbits all tend to ∞ and hence do not lie in or accumulate on J(Fλ), it follows that Fλ is hyperbolic on J(Fλ) 20 R.L. Devaney and standard arguments show that J(Fλ) is locally connected (see [4]). Hence J(Fλ) fulﬁlls the ﬁrst four of the conditions to be a Sierpinski curve. To ﬁnish proving that J(Fλ) is a Sierpinski curve we need to show that the bound- aries of Bλ as well as all of the preimages of Bλ are simple closed curves and that these boundary curves are pairwise disjoint. Now, since Bλ is a simply connected component of the Fatou set, it follows that the boundary of Bλ is locally connected. However, this boundary may have pinch points as in the case of quadratic Julia sets such as the basilica or Douady’s rabbit. This is the only non-standard portion of the proof. However, assuming these boundaries are indeed simple closed curves, they cannot intersect because any such intersection point would necessarily be a critical point. This follows because, for some high power k, Fk λ takes both of these curves to the boundary of Bλ, so the orbit of any intersection point must pass through a critical point since Fk λ is locally 2 to 1 there. For the proof that these boundaries are simple closed curves, we refer to [1]. 5 Classiﬁcation of Escape Time Julia Sets As can be seen in Fig. 2, there are a large number of Sierpinski holes in the parameter planes for these maps. We say that such a hole has escape time κ if, for each λ in the hole, the critical orbits land in Bλ at iteration κ. A parameter λ is called the center of the Sierpinski hole if the orbit of the critical points of Fλ all land on the point at ∞ rather than tend to ∞. The following result is proved in [5, 6]. Theorem 2 There is a unique center of each Sierpinski hole. Moreover, there are exactly (n − 1)(2n)κ−3 Sierpinski holes with escape time κ in the parameter plane. The proof of this result uses quasiconformal surgery techniques to show that there is a unique center of each Sierpinski hole. Given this, the equation for the centers of κ−1 (cλ) = 0, is easily seen to reduce to a polynomial equation the holes, namely F λ of degree (n − 1)(2n)κ−3, and so the roots of this equation are all distinct. As an example of the above count of Sierpinski holes, when n = 3 there are 2 Sierpinski holes in the parameter plane with escape time 3, 12 holes with escape time 4, 432 Sierpinski holes with escape time 6, and 120, 932, 352 holes with escape time 13. All of the parameters from this large collection of holes thus have Julia sets that are homeomorphic, so the natural question is: are the dynamics on these Julia sets the same? The answer to this question is given in [7]: Theorem 3 (Escape Time Conjugacy) Let Fλ(z) = zn + λ zn and Fμ(z) = zn + where λ and μ are parameters that lie in Sierpinski holes. 1. If λ and μ lie in the same Sierpinski hole, then Fλ and Fμ are topologically μ zn conjugate on their Julia sets; Singular Perturbations of Complex Analytic Dynamical Systems 21 2. If λ and μ lie in Sierpinski holes with different escape times, then Fλ and Fμ are not topologically conjugate on their Julia sets; 3. Suppose λ and μ are centers of different Sierpinski holes that have the same escape time. Let α be a primitive (n − 1)st root of unity. Then Fλ and Fμ are topologically conjugate on their Julia sets if and only if, for some integer j, • μ = α2jλ, or • μ = α2jλ. Therefore, if λ and μ are parameters lying in different Sierpinski holes whose escape times are the same, then Fλ and Fμ are topologically conjugate on their Julia sets if and only if the centers of these Sierpinski holes have the above property. The proof of the ﬁrst part of this theorem follows by quasiconformal surgery techniques. The second part follows from the fact that any conjugacy between Fλ and Fμ must take ∂Bλ to ∂Bμ, ∂Tλ to ∂Tμ, and the kth preimages of ∂Tλ to the corresponding preimages of ∂Tμ. But the preimages of Tλ and Tμ containing the critical points are special: their boundaries are mapped 2 to 1 onto their images, and these are the only preimages of ∂Tλ and ∂Tμ that have this property. Hence, two such conjugate maps must have the same escape times. Finally, for part three, it sufﬁces to consider the maps that are the centers of the corresponding holes. But these maps are “critically ﬁnite” in the sense that all of the critical orbits eventually land on the ﬁxed point at ∞. By Thurston’s Theorem [8], in the orientation preserving case, two such maps can be conjugated by a Möbius transformation. But such a conjugacy must then take ∞ to ∞ (since ∞ is the only superattracting ﬁxed point) and 0 to 0 (since 0 is the only preimage of ∞). It follows that the conjugacy must be of the form z (cid:3)→ αz. Then, comparing coefﬁcients in the conjugacy equation αFλ(z) = Fμ(αz) shows that αn−1 = 1 and μ = α2λ. In the case of an orientation reversing conjugacy, it is easy to check that Fλ is conjugate to Fλ via z (cid:3)→ z, so this gives all of the possible conjugate centers of Sierpinski holes. This result allows us to give a precise count of the number of different conjugacy classes of escape time Sierpinski curves, because only those holes that are symmet- ric under rotation by successive squares of a primitive (n − 1)st root of unity or by complex conjugation have the same dynamics. Theorem 4 (Number of Conjugacy Classes) The number of topological conjugacy classes of escape time Sierpinski curve Julia sets with escape time κ is given by 1. (2n)κ−3 if n is odd; 2. (2n)κ−3/2 + 2κ−4 if n is even. For example, when n = 3, we have seen that there are exactly 432 Sierpinski holes in this family with escape time 6, but there are only 216 different conjugacy classes of such maps. Similarly, there are 120, 932, 352 Sierpinski holes with escape 22 R.L. Devaney time 13 but only 60, 466, 176 different conjugacy classes, so clearly there is a great variety of different dynamical behaviors on these escape time Sierpinski curve Julia sets. The reason for the different number of conjugacy classes when n is even and odd comes from the fact that, when n is odd, there are no Sierpinski holes that meet the real axis (and so have no comple conjugate holes). Along the real axis there is only a pair of Mandelbrot sets and the McMullen domain. As a consequence, there are always exactly n − 1 different Sierpinski holes with conjugate dynamics. See Fig. 3 for a picture of the parameter plane when n = 3. When n is even, the situation is very different; there is always a Cantor necklace along the negative real axis (more about this in Sect. 7). See Figs. 2 and 5 for pictures of the parameter planes when n = 4 and n = 2. Fig. 3 The parameter plane for the family z3 + λ/z3 and several magniﬁcations. The central disk is the McMullen domain M. The simple closed curves in the Theorem accumulate on the boundary of M Singular Perturbations of Complex Analytic Dynamical Systems 23 6 Structure Around the McMullen Domain Recall that, when n > 2, if |λ| is sufﬁciently small, vλ lies in Tλ and J(Fλ) is a Cantor set of simple closed curves. The entire region in the parameter plane for which this occurs is called the McMullen domain, M. It is known [9] that M is an open, simply connected region that is bounded by a simple closed curve. In this section we describe some of the remarkable structure that surrounds M in the parameter plane. Since there is no McMullen domain when n = 2, the structure we describe below is absent in this case. In Fig. 3 we display the parameter plane for n = 3 together with two succes- sive magniﬁcations around M. Note that there appears to be a collection of closed curves surrounding ∂M that pass through more and more Sierpinski holes as these curves approach ∂M. Closer inspection seems to indicate that these curves also pass through small copies of Mandelbrot sets as well. This is indeed true, as the following result was shown in [5, 10]. Theorem 5 (Rings around the McMullen domain) For each n ≥ 3, the McMullen domain is surrounded by inﬁnitely many simple closed curves Sk for k = 1,2, . . . having the property that: 1. Each curve Sk surrounds M as well as Sk+1, and the Sk accumulate on the boundary of the McMullen domain as k → ∞. 2. The curve Sk meets the centers of τ n k + 2, where k Sierpinski holes, each with escape time τ n k = (n − 2)nk−1 + 1. 3. The curve Sk also passes through τ n k centers of baby Mandelbrot sets, and these Mandelbrot sets and Sierpinski holes alternate as the parameter winds around

Sk. By a center of a baby Mandelbrot set, we mean the parameter drawn from the main cardioid of the Mandelbrot set for which the corresponding attracting cycle is actually superattracting, i.e., one of the critical points of Fλ is periodic. It turns out that all of these baby Mandelbrot sets are buried in the sense that they do not touch the outer boundary of the connectedness locus in the parameter plane. Then it is known that any parameter drawn from the main cardioid of this Mandelbrot set has a Julia set that is also a Sierpinski curve. These Sierpinski curves are dynami- cally very different from the escape time Sierpinski curves produced by the Escape Trichotomy, since each has an attracting cycle whose boundary curves are disjoint simple closed curves that are invariant under some iterate of Fλ. For an escape time Sierpinski curve, there is only one invariant boundary curve, namely ∂Bλ. For a proof that parameters from the main cardioids of buried baby Mandlebrot sets also yield Sierpinski curves, see [5, 11]. Here are some of the ideas involved in the proof of the rings around M theorem. When λ satisﬁes |λ| < 2−2n/(n−1), one checks easily that |vλ| < |cλ|. So the critical circle Cλ lies in the exterior of its image, the critical line. Then there is a preimage 24 R.L. Devaney λ , ζ 2 λ , that is mapped n to 1 to ζ 1 of Cλ, ζ 1 λ , that lies outside of Cλ and is mapped n to 1 onto Cλ. Then there is an outer preimage of ζ 1 λ , and so forth. We thus ﬁnd an inﬁnite collection of closed curves ζ k λ moving outward from the critical circle in the dynamical plane and having the property that each ζ k λ contains exactly nk · 2n points that are mapped by Fk λ to one of the critical points in Cλ and the same number of points that are similarly mapped to a prepole in Cλ. Now Fλ takes the interior of Cλ to the complement of the critical line as an n to 1 covering map. So one can consider the map φ(λ) = Fλ(vλ). This is a map that takes the parameter plane to the dynamical plane. One can show that this map is univalent on each of the n−1 sectors in the parameter plane bounded by the straight rays through the “spines” of the n−1 large Mandelbrot sets symmetrically arranged around the origin. Moreover, φ takes each such sector onto C minus a pair of half-lines. Now consider a particular kth preimage of one of the critical points lying in Cλ that lies in ζ k λ . Call this point uλ. Then uλ varies analytically with λ as λ ranges over each of the sectors. So we can consider the analytic map (cid:11)(λ) = φ−1(uλ). This map takes the sector in the parameter plane to itself. Then one can show using the Schwarz Lemma that (cid:11) has a unique ﬁxed point in this sector. This ﬁxed point is a parameter λ∗ for which φ(λ∗) = uλ∗ , i.e., Fλ∗ (vλ∗ ) lands on the given kth preimage of a critical point. Then either this critical point or its negative is ﬁxed by Fk+2 . This λ∗ produces a center of a baby Mandelbrot set for each of the given critical points on ζ k λ (modulo an identiﬁcation as λ winds around the origin). We similarly get centers of Sierpinski holes by letting uλ be a preimage of a prepole instead of a critical point. 7 Cantor Necklaces There is another structure called Cantor necklaces that occurs in both the dynamical and parameter planes for these maps. A Cantor necklace is a planar set that is home- omorphic to the following set. Consider the Cantor middle-thirds set lying in the unit interval. Replace each removed open interval with a circular open disk whose diameter is the same as the length of the removed interval and whose boundary touches the two endpoints of the removed interval. The union of the Cantor set with these countably many open disks is a Cantor necklace. To see Cantor necklaces in these families of maps, we restrict for simplicity to the case n = 2 (though the same proof works more or less verbatim when n > 2). Let the four critical points of Fλ be denoted by c0, . . . ,c3 where the cj vary analytically with λ and, when λ ∈ R+, c0 ∈ R+ and the other critcal points are arranged around the origin in counterclockwise fashion. For each λ in the connectedness locus, we may pick ν > 1 so that the circle of radius ν lies in Bλ. Let βλ be the preimage of this circle that lies in Bλ and let τλ be the corresponding preimage in Tλ. Then consider the following two regions I0 and I1. The set I0 is the smaller of the two regions bounded by the critical rays through c0 and c3 and the curves βλ and τλ. Let I1 = −I0. Then Fλ maps both I0 and I1 univalently over I0 ∪ I1. Standard techniques from complex dynamics then show that the set of points whose orbits remain for all time in I0 ∪ I1 is a Cantor set, just as in part 1 of the Escape Trichotomy. Singular Perturbations of Complex Analytic Dynamical Systems 25 Now there is a ﬁxed point in I0 and a preimage of this ﬁxed point in I1 and one checks easily that both of these points lie in ∂Bλ. Similarly, there are two preimages of the preﬁxed point in ∂Tλ, and pre-preimages of these points in two preimages of ∂Tλ. Continuing in this manner, we may adjoin all of these appropriate preimages of Tλ to the “endpoints” in the Cantor set and the resulting set is a Cantor necklace. To see at least a portion of the Cantor necklace in the parameter plane when n = 2, consider the region D in parameter plane that is the portion of the disk of radius 2 centered at the origin that lies in the left half plane. Since the second iterate of the critical point is given by the map φ(λ) = 4λ + 1/4, it follows that φ(D) is a half disk that strictly contains D. Now, for each λ ∈ D, we can construct the Cantor set in the dynamical plane as above. Furthermore, if λ ∈ D, then the set I1 is easily seen to be contained in the disk D for each λ ∈ D, provided the outer radius ν < 2. (The Cantor set construction holds even if λ is not in the connectedness locus.) Now ﬁx any point zλ in the Cantor set. Here zλ is a point with a given itinerary in I0 ∪ I1, so zλ varies analytically with λ. Thus we have two maps that are deﬁned on D, the map φ and zλ. The map φ is invertible, so one may check easily that the map λ (cid:3)→ φ−1(zλ) takes D inside itself. By the Schwarz Lemma, this map then has a unique ﬁxed point in D. This point is the unique parameter for which the second iterate of the critical points all land on the given point in the Cantor set. Hence we get one such parameter corresponding to each point in the Cantor set, and these points then form the Cantor set portion of the Cantor necklace in the parameter plane. To get the other part of the necklace, we adjoin the associated Sierpinski holes just as we did in the dynamical plane case. One may extend this necklace to include parameters for which the critical orbits land on the portion of the Cantor set in I0. See [12] for details. Figure 4 displays the Fig. 4 A portion of the Cantor necklace in the parameter plane for the family z2 + λ/z2. Note the large Sierpinski hole along the negative real axis ﬂanked by two smaller Sierpinski holes which are, in turn, each ﬂanked by two smaller Sierpinski holes, etc 26 R.L. Devaney portion of the Cantor necklace corresponding to parameters for which the critical orbits land on points in I1. 8 The Case n=2 As mentioned above, the situation in the case n = 2 is very different. We no longer have a McMullen domain. Rather, the following result is shown in [12]: Theorem 6 Suppose n = 2. Then, in every neighborhood of the origin in the param- eter plane, there are inﬁnitely many disjoint open sets Oj, j = 1, 2, 3, . . ., containing parameters having the following properties: 1. If λ ∈ Oj, then the Julia set of Fλ is a Sierpinski curve, so that if λ ∈ Oj and μ ∈ Ok, the Julia sets of Fλ and Fμ are homeomorphic; 2. But if k (cid:6)= j, the maps Fλ and Fμ are not topologically conjugate on their respec- tive Julia sets. In Fig. 5 we display the parameter plane for the case n = 2 together with a magniﬁcation. The large central region is not a McMullen domain; rather it is a Sierpinski hole and it does not contain the origin. We sketch the proof of this. We shall show that there are inﬁnitely many open intervals in R− in any neighborhood of the origin in parameter space in which the critical orbit eventually escapes. These Sierpinski holes need not lie along R−; we choose this just to simplify the proof. Recall that, when n = 2, the four critical points and four prepoles of Fλ all lie on the critical circle of radius |λ|1/4 centered at the origin. Also, the second image of all of the critical points is given by Fig. 5 The parameter plane for the family z2 + λ/z2 and a magniﬁcation centered at the origin Singular Perturbations of Complex Analytic Dynamical Systems 27 λ(cλ) = 4λ + 1 F2 4 λ(cλ) is an analytic function of λ that is a homeomorphism. If and so λ (cid:3)→ F2 −1/16 < λ < 0, then one checks easily that the critical circle is mapped strictly inside itself. It follows that J(Fλ) is a connected set and Bλ and Tλ are disjoint. In particular, the second image of the critical point lands on the real axis and lies in the complement of Bλ in R. We claim that there is an increasing sequence λ2,λ3, . . . in R− with λj → 0 and Fj λ(cλ) = 4λ + λ(cλj ) > 0 for all i < j. To see this, note that, since F2 (cλj ) = 0 but Fi λj 1/4, this quantity increases monotonically toward 1/4 as λ → 0−. Now the orbit of 1/4 remains in R+ for all iterations of F0 and decreases monotonically to 0. Hence, λ(cλ) also lies in R+ for 2 ≤ j ≤ N and moreover given N, for λ sufﬁciently small, Fj this ﬁnite sequence is decreasing. Now suppose β < α < 0. We have Fβ (x) < Fα(x) for all x ∈ R+. Also, F2 α(cα) < 1/4. Hence Fj α(cα) for all j for β (cβ ) ∈ R+. The result then follows by continuity of Fλ with respect to λ. which Fj Thus we have inﬁnitely many Sierpinski holes in the parameter plane converging to 0 in R−. Since the escape times of these Sierpinski holes are all different, it follows that any two parameters drawn from diferent holes in this collection have non-conjugate dynamics (as shown in Section 5). β (cβ ) < Fj β (cβ ) < F2 Note that λ2 = −1/16. Using the previous observation, we may ﬁnd open inter- λ(cλ) ∈ Tλ, λ(cλ) → ∞ as n → ∞, and the Escape Tri- vals Ij about λj for j = 2, 3, . . . having the property that, if λ ∈ Ij, then Fj and so Fj+1 (cλ) ∈ Bλ. Therefore, Fn chotomy then shows that J(Fλ) is a Sierpinski curve. λ 9 Julia Sets Converging to the Unit Disk There is another way that the case n = 2 differs sharply from the case n > 2. Here the situation involves the structure of the Julia sets of Fλ when λ is close to 0. As we saw above, when n > 2 and |λ| is small enough, λ lies in the McMullen domain and so the corresponding Julia sets are always Cantor sets of concentric simple closed curves. But when n = 2, the Julia sets vary wildly; often, but not always, they are Sierpinski curves. For example, in Fig. 5, note that there is a copy of the Mandelbrot set whose “tail” actually extends to the origin. Whenever λ is chosen in this set, J(Fλ) contains small pieces that are homeomorphic to the corresponding Julia set from the quadratic family z2 + c together with inﬁnitely many preimages of ∂Bλ (as well as other buried points). In Fig. 6, note that as the parameter approaches 0, the size of the preimages of the trap door seems to decrease and the Julia set seems to grow “larger.” This is indeed the case, for in [13] it was shown: Theorem 7 When n = 2, as λ → 0, J(Fλ) converges to the closed unit disk in the Hausdorff topology. On the other hand, when n > 2, this is not the case, as the 28 R.L. Devaney λ = –1/4 λ = –1/16 λ = –0.01 λ = –0.001 Fig. 6 Sierpinski curve Julia sets for various negative values of λ in the case n = 2. All of these sets are homeomorphic, but the dynamical behavior on each is very different Fatou set always contains an annular component that contains a round annulus of some ﬁxed width for all λ lying in some disk about the origin. This ﬁrst part of this result is somewhat surprising, since it is well known that Julia sets can never contain open sets unless the Julia set is the entire Riemann sphere. So here we ﬁnd Julia sets getting arbitrarily close to the unit disk as λ → 0. Of course, when λ = 0, there is an “implosion” and the Julia set is equal to the unit circle, not the unit disk. The reason why these Julia sets converge to the closed unit disk D is as follows. Suppose that this is not the case. Then, given any sufﬁciently small (cid:14) > 0, we may ﬁnd a sequence of parameters λj → 0 and another sequence of points zj ∈ D such that J(Fλj ) ∩ B2(cid:14)(zj) = ∅ for each j. Here B2(cid:14)(zj) is the disk of radius 2(cid:14) about zj. Singular Perturbations of Complex Analytic Dynamical Systems 29 Since D is compact, there is a subsequence of the zj that converges to some nonzero point z∗ ∈ D. For inﬁnitely many parameters in the corresponding subsequence, we then have J(Fλj ) ∩ B(cid:14)(z∗) = ∅. Hence we may assume at the outset that we are dealing with a subsequence λj → 0 such that J(Fλj ) ∩ B(cid:14)(z∗) = ∅. Now consider the circle of radius |z∗| centered at the origin. This circle meets B(cid:14)(z∗) in an arc γ of length (cid:15). Choose k so that 2k(cid:15) ≥ 2π . Since λj → 0, we may (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) is very small for 1 ≤ i ≤ k, provided z choose j large enough so that lies outside the circle of radius |z∗|/2 centered at the origin. In particular, it follows (γ ) (γ ) is a curve whose argument increases by at least 2π , i.e., the curve Fk that Fk λj λj (γ ) must wraps at least once around the origin. As a consequence, the curve Fk λj meet the Cantor necklace in the dynamical plane. But the boundary of this neck- lace lies in J(Fλj ). Hence J(Fλj ) must intersect this boundary. Since the Julia set is backward invariant, it follows that J(Fλj ) must intersect B(cid:14)(z∗). This then yields a contradiction, and so the result follows.

We review some examples of dynamics displaying sequential switching for systems of coupled phase oscillators. As an illustration we discuss a simple fam- ily of coupled phase oscillators for which one can ﬁnd robust heteroclinic networks between unstable cluster states. For N = 2k + 1 oscillators we show that there can be open regions in parameter space where the heteroclinic networks have the structure of an odd graph of order k; a class of graphs known from permutation theory. These networks lead to slow sequential switching between cluster states that is driven by noise and/or imperfections in the system. The dynamics observed is of relevance to modelling the emergent complex dynamical behaviour of coupled oscillator systems, e.g. for coupled chemical oscillators and neural networks. 1 Introduction Coupled phase oscillator networks provide a set of models that are very useful in a variety of applications ranging from theoretical and computational neuroscience [10, 11, 17, 18] to coupled chemical reactors [21]. They provide models that are amenable to variety of approaches aimed at understanding the emergent phenom- ena of such nonlinear dynamical systems. These approaches include “continuum approximations” as well as detailed studies of the dynamics and bifurcations of small numbers of oscillators; see [31] for a review. This paper reviews some recent results on switching dynamics for small numbers of oscillators. It is also explained how one of the dynamical structures (heteroclinic networks with odd graph struc- tures) can be observed on scaling up to large numbers of oscillators. The phase oscillator approach can be used in applications where the dynamics of individual elements can be modelled as a limit cycle oscillator and that can be characterised by a scalar phase variable. This is particularly the case if there is weak coupling between the oscillators, or more speciﬁcally if the timescale associated with the coupling is much longer than the timescale associated with relaxation onto the limit cycle [6, 10, 17]. Moreover, phase models are typically useful even far from the weak coupling limit, especially concerning their predictions for generic bifurcations and attractors. Clearly, the structure of coupling between oscillators is critical to determine what sort of dynamics is possible on a network of coupled oscillators, and there is a vast literature looking at the topology of coupling and the inﬂuence this has on the network dynamics; see for instance [1] and references therein. For the particular problem of synchronization this has been investigated by many authors, allowing for a variety of effects such as time-dependent coupling [7, 25] or delay in coupling [19, 32]. For the main part of this paper we do not address such issues, but rather explore the question of generic but complicated dynamics that can appear even for very simple all-to-all (fully symmetric) coupling. Indeed, this emphasises that not only the network structure, but also the actual coupling function is vital in determin- ing the emergent dynamics of the system. In this paper we review some recent work on the detailed dynamics of globally coupled phase oscillators, concentrating on the appearance of robust heteroclinic network attractors. These attractors manifest themselves in the dynamics as a “per- sistent transient” of slow switching between a number of unstable states that is driven by noise and/or imperfections. Such dynamics were ﬁrst discovered in [17] and further studies have been made in [22, 23], mostly working with large popula- tions. In Sect. 2 we review the fundamental dynamical principles of coupled phase oscillator systems with permutation symmetry. In Sect. 3 we discuss a detailed study of bifurcations leading to sequential slow switching attractors and show that they are only possible for N ≥ 4; see [4]. In Sect. 4 we present a new result arising from [8] showing that a particular combinatorial structure can appear in the dynamics for coupling as in [17], for open sets of system parameters and arbitrarily large N. Consider N identical phase oscillators that are coupled identically to each other ˙θi = ω + K N N(cid:3) j=1 g(θi − θj) , (1) where the dot denotes differentiation with respect to time t and θi ∈ T = [0, 2π ), i = 1 . . . N, i.e. the state space is the N-torus TN. We will use the vector notation θ = col[ θ1, . . . , θN ]. The function g : [0, 2π ) → R is a 2π -periodic coupling func- tion that we will assume to be smooth. We include a coupling strength parameter K for convenience but will set this to K = 1 by rescaling time. For a given coupling function g and number of oscillators N, the dynamics of (1) can include a wide range of behaviours including in-phase (synchronous) oscillations, antiphase oscillations, and indeed arbitrarily complex partially syn- chronized cluster states that are stable [29]. However, system (1) can give much more complicated dynamics than just stable clustering. If the cluster states are of Heteroclinic Switching in Coupled Oscillator Networks 33 saddle type, robust heteroclinic connections may be found. This is because clus- ter states may have unstable manifolds contained within the stable manifold of another state; see, for example, [2, 17, 22]. This is not possible for the coupling function g(ϕ) = − sin (ϕ) of the Kuramoto model [24] or the coupling function g(ϕ) = − sin (ϕ + α) of the Kuramoto-Sakaguchi model [3], but it is possible for slightly more complicated coupling functions. Choosing the coupling function g(ϕ) = − sin (ϕ + α) + r sin (2ϕ) , (2) robust heteroclinic connections can be found that exist for open sets of parameter values on the (α, r) parameter plane [17]. Note that this coupling can be obtained from phase reduction of coupled Hodgkin-Huxley neurons with synaptic coupling [18]. More general couplings are considered for example in [12, 29]. We remark that system (1) can have highly nontrivial behaviour even for the Kuramoto coupling function if the frequencies are made non-identical; see [33]. In Sects. 3 and 4 we study the dynamics of certain parameter regimes for coupling (2), to illuminate the dynamics of system (1) and to better understand the graph structure of a possible heteroclinic network as N increases. 2 Dynamics and Bifurcations with SN Symmetry Here we review techniques from dynamical systems and bifurcation theory with symmetry [16, 15, 26, 27], noting that (1) is symmetric under all permutations of coordinates. In other words the dynamics is equivariant under the set SN of permu- tations acting by σ (θ1, · · · , θN) = (θσ (1), · · · , θσ (N)) . (3) In addition to this, the system (1) has a symmetry given by translation of all components by the same phase shift: for all ρ ∈ [0, 2π ) we have invariance under ρ(θ1, · · · , θN) = (θ1 + ρ, · · · , θN + ρ) , (4) meaning that the system has symmetry SN × S1. This has many dynamical con- sequences, the most obvious of which is that there will be an in-phase or fully synchronized solution θi(t) = Ωt + r, (5) for i = 1, · · · , N where Ω = ω + g(0) and r is constant. This solution may or may not be an attractor depending on its linear stability. Another consequence of symmetry is that there will be a number of invariant subspaces forced by the symmetry; the most general of these being the “rotating 34 P. Ashwin et al. block” structures discussed in [6, 9]. We will focus on a particular case here; the M cluster states, for 1 ≤ M ≤ N. We deﬁne an M-cluster partition A = {A1, . . . , AM} of {1, . . . , N} to be a partition such that {1, . . . , N} = M(cid:4) p=1 Ap , (6) where the Ap are pairwise disjoint sets (Ap ∩ Aq = ∅ if p (cid:6)= q). Summing up the cluster sizes ap = |Ap| gives M(cid:3) p=1 ap = N . (7) Denoting the phase of the p-th cluster by ψp, i.e. deﬁning ψp: = θi = θj = θk = . . . such that {i, j, k, . . .} ⊂ Ap we obtain ˙ψp = ω + 1 N M(cid:3) q=1 aq g(ψp − ψq) , (8) for p = 1, . . . , M. The dynamics in such a subspace can be very complex, but ini- tially we investigate simple clustering behaviour ψp = Ω t + φp , (9) for p = 1, . . . , M, where Ω ∈ R+ and φp ∈ T. Since θ describes the phases of oscillators, (9) describes a periodic orbit in the state space of those oscillators. Note that typical points in such a cluster state have symmetries obtained by all permutations within a cluster, i.e. an M-cluster state with partition A will have in terms of spatial symmetries Sa1 × · · · × SaM . (10) If there are any spatiotemporal symmetries these must be of the form of some cyclic permutation of clusters of equal size: they must be a semidirect product of permutations with the cycling (cid:5) Sa1 (cid:6) k ⊗ Zk , × · · · × Sa(cid:15) (11) where the M = k(cid:15) clusters permuted in groups of (cid:15) and k (a1 + · · · + a(cid:15)) = N [6]. Note that the S1 action is such that one can reduce the full dynamics of (1) to the dynamics of the phase differences and a translation on the S1 orbit (group orbit). This means that, for example, the periodic orbits of (1) can be found by examining equilibria of the phase differences. Heteroclinic Switching in Coupled Oscillator Networks 35 Linearisations of systems near equilibria with symmetries have structure forced upon them by the presence of symmetry; they must be block-diagonal with respect to the isotypic decomposition of the tangent space with respect to the group that ﬁxes the equilibrium (the isotropy subgroup of the equilibrium). As a consequence, generic bifurcations with any symmetry group will have a centre manifold on which the action of the isotropy subgroup is an irreducible representation (irrep) [15, 16]. The permutation action of SN on TN neatly splits into two irreps, one which is a 1-dimensional trivial action and one which is an irreducible (N − 1)-dimensional action. (There are other nontrivial irreps for SN but they do not appear in (1).) More- over, the nontrivial irrep corresponds precisely to the phase difference coordinates. The generic SN symmetry breaking bifurcations for the nontrivial irrep have been studied and classiﬁed; see, for example, [15]. However, the topology of the torus TN can and does easily associate local symmetry breaking bifurcations with global bifurcations, as we will see in Sect. 3; see also [3, 6]. Typically, SN symmetry break- ing bifurcation from a stable fully symmetric state will result in a system with no nearby stable branches after bifurcation; this is associated in our system with global bifurcations that may lead to a stable cluster state or (only for N ≥ 4) a robust heteroclinic attractor. Note that periodic solutions of (1) with symmetry (11) can be interpreted in terms of cluster states in state space; for instance, • SN corresponds to in-phase solutions θk = Ωt + γ , k = 1, . . . , N • ZN corresponds to anti-phase or “splay phase” solutions θk = Ωt + γ + 2kπ/N, • (SN/2)2 ⊗ Z2 corresponds to antiphase solutions such as θk = Ωt + γ , θk+N/2 = k = 1, . . . , N Ωt + γ + π , k = 1, . . . , N/2 where Ω ∈ IR+ and γ ∈ Tj see (5) and (9). Finally, we note that symmetry means that cluster states will appear in conjugate families; if a particular clustering is realised as a periodic orbit then so will all permutations of that clustering. This means that subspaces with conjugate isotropy subgroups will support identical dynamics. 3 Bifurcations for Three and Four Globally Coupled Oscillators Returning to the speciﬁc system (1, 2), one can calculate the bifurcation behaviour in detail for small numbers of oscillators; this was done for N = 3 and N = 4 in [3] and here we brieﬂy summarise some of the results, in particular with the aim of identifying where heteroclinic networks appear in parameter and state space. Figure 1 shows the bifurcation diagram for N = 3 in the (r, α) plane and Table 1 describes brieﬂy each of the lines of codimension-one bifurcations (both reproduced from [3]). The bifurcation diagram is shown surrounded by phase portraits in the (θ1 − θ2, θ1 − θ3) ∈ [0, 2π )2 plane. 36 P. Ashwin et al. Fig. 1 Bifurcation curves in the (r, α) parameter plane for system (1) with coupling (2) in case of N = 3 (reproduced from [3]). The phase portraits are shown for (θ1 − θ2, θ1 − θ3) ∈ [0, 2π )2. The codimension-one bifurcations are listed in Table 1. Note that there are heteroclinic/homoclinic cycles only on the lines BE, ED and HCD for N = 3. There are codimension-two bifurcations: A – cusp point; E – interaction of transcritical homoclinic and saddle-node homoclinic; D – interaction of saddle-node heteroclinic and saddle connection heteroclinic; H – degenerate Hopf bifurcation of antiphase Moving on to the case for N = 4 oscillators, there are 12 invariant regions corre- sponding to points on T4 that lift to the set {(θ1, θ2, θ3, θ4) : θσ (1) ≤ θσ (2) ≤ θσ (3) ≤ θσ (4) ≤ θσ (1) + 2π }. (12) for permutations σ ∈ S4. Figure 2 illustrates one of these invariant tetrahedra plotted in the (θ1 − θ2, θ1 − θ3, θ1 − θ4) ∈ [0, 2π )3 space. In Fig. 3 a bifurcation diagram is shown for the case N = 4 in the (r, α) plane, while Table 2 lists the codimension-one bifurcations (both reproduced from [3]). Heteroclinic Switching in Coupled Oscillator Networks 37 Table 1 The letters label the curves of codimension-one bifurcations for N = 3 illustrated in Fig. 1 (reproduced from [3]) ID BEGH HFAED BE ED BD HCD DJ DK DL Pitchfork bifurcation on invariant lines Transcritical bifurcation at 0 Saddle-node bifurcation on invariant lines Transcritical homoclinic bifurcation Saddle-node homoclinic bifurcation Saddle-node of limit cycles Saddle connection heteroclinic bifurcation Pitchfork bifurcation Saddle-node bifurcation Saddle-node bifurcation Observe that there is a similar set of bifurcations as in Fig. 3. In particular, for r small and −π/2 < α < π/2 we have stable in-phase solutions while for r small and π/2 < α < 3π/2 we have stable antiphase solutions. For both N = 3 and N = 4 the point (r, α) = (0, π/2) acts as an “organizing centre” for a number of lines of bifurcations that coincide at this point. Note that the Kuramoto-Sakaguchi coupling function (Eq. (2) with r = 0) is highly degenerate at the point α = π/2. In the shaded region BEDTLV of Fig. 3, the dynamics consists of robust hetero- clinic cycles between symmetrically related cluster states with S2 × S2 symmetry. S3 × S1 (cid:2)4 (S2)2 ⊗ (cid:2)2 (cid:2)2 S2 × S2 Fig. 2 Diagram showing one of the invariant regions (12) in state space for N = 4 oscillators (reproduced from [3]). This shows the relationship between the subspaces with differing symme- tries. The point at the centre is the antiphase solution with Z4 symmetry and the faces of the invariant tetrahedron is made of points with S2 symmetry 38 P. Ashwin et al. H 0.5 r 0.4 0.3 I 0.2 0.1 0 0 J L R M V Q T K D G F E A B 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 α Fig. 3 Bifurcation diagram for N = 4 oscillators in the (α, r) plane (adapted from [3]); see Table 2 for a description of the bifurcation curves. There are robust heteroclinic cycles between 2-cluster states in the shaded region outlined by BEDTLV. These cycles are attractors to the left of the line BM. There is a complicated sequence of bifurcations in the near vicinity of point D that not is discussed here in detail the curve BM. The S2 × S2 These cycles are attracting to the left of symmetry corresponds to 2-cluster states where each cluster contains two oscilla- tors. For example, the partition A = {{1, 2}, {3, 4}} , gives [ a1, a2 ] = [ 2, 2 ] and the corresponding cluster phases can be deﬁned as ψ1: = θ1 = θ2 , ψ2: = θ3 = θ4 . (13) (14) Table 2 A list of codimension-one bifurcations for N = 4 that are illustrated in Fig. 3 (reproduced from [3]) BEGH BQ BV Transcritical-pitchfork bifurcation at 0 Inverse pitchfork bifurcation of saddles at the point with (S2)2 ⊗ Z2 symmetry Pitchfork/heteroclinic bifurcation of solutions with symmetry S2 × S2 (in transversal to S2 × S2 direction) BM HAED IFGD DK DJ DTL BTR Hopf bifurcation of antiphase points Z4 and change of stability of robust heteroclinic cycles Saddle-node bifurcation to solutions with symmetry S3 × S1 Transcritical bifurcation of solutions with symmetry S3 × S1 Saddle connection bifurcation (not heteroclinic) in subspace with symmetry S2 Transcritical bifurcation of solutions with symmetry S3 × S1 Saddle-node bifurcation inside tetrahedra on S2 plane Pitchfork bifurcation of limit cycles within tetrahedron Heteroclinic Switching in Coupled Oscillator Networks 39 Investigating the simple clustering behaviour (9) in these subspaces one may ﬁnd the cluster states [ ψ1, ψ2 ] = Ω t + [ a, b ] , [ ψ1, ψ2 ] = Ω t + [ b, a ] , (15) where only the phase difference a − b can be determined. By dropping Ωt we intro- duce the notation P1 = [ a, a, b, b ] , P2 = [ b, b, a, a ] , (16) for these cluster states. (a) S3 × S1 P2 S2 × S2 S3 × S1 Γ1 S3 × S1 Γ1 Γ2 P1 P3 (b) V 3 (c) Γ3 Γ1 P1 Γ4 P4 P2 V 1 Γ2 V 2 V 4 Fig. 4 Heteroclinic cycles for N = 4 oscillators. Panel (a) shows the detailed dynamics involving the saddle cluster states P1, P2 (16) (adapted from [3]). The cycle between states P1, P2 (16) and the cycle between states P3, P4 (17) are shown schematically in panel (b). Panel (c) represents the net- work as an undirected graph where the vertices V 1, . . . ,V 4 correspond to cluster states P1, . . . , P4 and edges are drawn between them when heteroclinic connections exist. The parameters are from the shaded area BEDTLV in Fig. 3 40 P. Ashwin et al. One may ﬁnd that the clusters with phase b are unstable to perturbations that split the oscillators and there exist heteroclinic orbits Γ1 and Γ2 that connect P1 and P2. Figure 4a illustrates this dynamics in state space (adapted from [3]). One may also ﬁnd a similar cycle between the 2-cluster states P3 = [ a, b, a, b ] , P4 = [ b, a, b, a ] . corresponding to the partition ˜A = {{1, 3}, {2, 4}} . (17) (18) The heteroclinic cycles are sketched in Fig. 4b and the corresponding graph structure of the network is shown in Fig. 4c. The vertex V m represents the cluster state Pm and vertices are connected by edges when there are heteroclinic connec- tions between the corresponding cluster states. Observe that there exist switching dynamics between cluster states but the network structure is trivial: the heteroclinic network splits into two disconnected components. For N ≥ 5 the network becomes connected and much more complex as will be shown in the next section. 4 Heteroclinic Networks for Odd Numbers of Oscillators Here we consider some of the scaling properties of the robust heteroclinic networks discussed in the previous section, for more larger numbers of oscillators. As noted in [8] for odd numbers of oscillators, N = 2k + 1 (k ≥ 2), one can obtain open regions of parameter space in which there are heteroclinic networks with the structure of an odd graph; in this paper we characterise this statement in detail and ﬁnd the corresponding regions in parameter space numerically. (cid:9) An odd graph of order k is a family of partition-deﬁned graphs deﬁned as follows. of N = Let the vertex V m represent a possible 2-cluster partition Am = = [ k, k + 1 ]. We call such partitions [ k, k + 1 ] cluster states; 2k + 1 when they clearly have Sk × Sk+1 symmetry. There are m = 1, . . . , N!/(k!(k + 1)!) such vertices. We say there is an edge from a vertex V m to a vertex V n if 1 , Am Am 2 1 , am am 2 (cid:8) (cid:7) (cid:10) An 1 ⊂ Am 2 , (19) i.e. if the larger cluster of Am contains the smaller cluster of An. This graph is highly connected and each vertex has k+1 outgoing edges corresponding to which element in Am 1. The high level of connectivity of these graphs has resulted in suggestions to use the structure for fault-tolerant networks; see, for example, [14]. Examples of odd graphs of orders k = 3 and k = 4 are shown in Fig. 5. 2 that is not in An We demonstrate that for system (1) with coupling (2) and any odd N = 2k + 1, k = 2, 3, . . . there is an open sets of parameters near r = 0 and α = π/2 such that there is a heteroclinic network that contains the structure of an odd graph of Heteroclinic Switching in Coupled Oscillator Networks 41 V m V m V 2 V 1 V 1 V n n V k = 3,  N = 7 k = 4,  N = 9 Fig. 5 Odd graphs of order k = 3 and k = 4; these structures are robustly present in hetero- clinic networks of the coupled oscillator system (1) with coupling function (2) for N = 7 and N = 9 oscillators, respectively. The number of vertexes are 35 and 126, respectively, and they are presented in an analogous way to Fig. 4c order k. This network is robust to perturbations of the coupling function g that are sufﬁciently small in the C2 norm. First, we show that two distinct families of [ k, k + 1 ] cluster states may exist. We call these ab cluster states and cd cluster states, as will be clariﬁed in Sect. 4.1; see also [2]. The ab cluster states are unstable to perturbations of the smaller cluster while the cd cluster states are unstable to perturbations of the larger cluster. Then we show that there may be heteroclinic connections from ab cluster states to cd cluster states and also from cd cluster states to ab cluster states. This means that apply- ing perturbations to the appropriate (unstable) clusters one may navigate from a ab cluster state to another ab cluster state through a cd cluster state. Such navigation between the m-th and n-th ab cluster states is possible if and only if there is an edge between vertices V m and V n on the corresponding odd graph of order k; see Fig. 5. Notice that the odd graphs are not directed graphs: in fact if it is possible to navigate from the m-th ab cluster state to the n-th one, then it is possible to navigate the other way, through a different cd cluster state. 4.1 Existence, Stability and Connections of [ k, k + 1 ] Cluster States Consider the 2-cluster partition A1 = {{1, . . . , k}, {k + 1, . . . , 2k + 1}} (20) 42 P. Ashwin et al. so that [ a1, a2 ] = [ k, k + 1 ] (that is indeed a [ k, k + 1 ] cluster state) and deﬁne the cluster phases as ψ1: = θ1 = . . . = θk , ψ2: = θk+1 = . . . = θ2k+1 . From (8), the equations for the time evolution of the cluster phases become ˙ψ1 = ω + 1 N ˙ψ2 = ω + 1 N (cid:6) (cid:5) a1 g(0) + a2 g(ψ1 − ψ2) (cid:5) (cid:6) a1 g(ψ2 − ψ1) + a2 g(0) , . (21) (22) Considering the periodic orbit (9) and introducing the notation φ: = φ1 − φ2 formula we have 0 = a1(g(0) − g( − φ)) + a2(g(φ) − g(0)) (23) to determine the phase difference φ. Linearizing (22) one may obtain the tangential stability which has a trivial eigen- value λ1 = 0 and a tangential eigenvalue λ2 = 1 N (cid:5) (cid:18) a1 g (cid:18) ( − φ) + a2 g (φ) (cid:6) , (24) corresponding to perturbations that do not split either of the clusters. The lineariza- tion of (1) gives the transverse eigenvalues λ3 = 1 N λ4 = 1 N (cid:5) (cid:18) a1 g (cid:5) (cid:18) a1 g (cid:18) (0) + a2 g (φ) (cid:6) , (cid:18) ( − φ) + a2 g (cid:6) (0) , (25) where λ3 corresponds to splitting of the cluster of k and has multiplicity k − 1 while λ4 corresponds to splitting of the cluster of k + 1 and has multiplicity k. Note that the dynamics in subspace (21) corresponding to partition A1 is effec- tively one-dimensional. Deﬁning the variable ψ: = ψ1 − ψ2 and subtracting the second equation from the ﬁrst one in (22) results in ˙ψ = 1 N (cid:5) a1(g(0) − g( − ψ)) + a2(g(ψ) − g(0)) (cid:6) . (26) There is an equilibrium ψ(t) ≡ φ determined by (23) while the related eigenvalue is given by (24). Substituting (2) and N = 2k + 1 into (26) and considering the large k limit we have Heteroclinic Switching in Coupled Oscillator Networks ˙ψ = − cos α sin ψ + r sin (2 ψ) + O (cid:11) (cid:12) . 1 2k + 1 Now consider the 2-cluster partition A2 = {{k + 2, . . . , 2k + 1}, {1, . . . , k + 1}} 43 (27) (28) for which [ ˜a1, ˜a2 ] = [ k, k + 1 ] and the corresponding cluster phases can be deﬁned as ˜ψ1: = θk+2 = . . . = θ2k+1 , ˜ψ2: = θ1 = . . . = θk+1 . (29) The evolution of these phases are still given by (22) so one may ﬁnd the same equilibria with the same stability properties as for partition A1 (20). According to (19), since {k + 2, . . . , 2k + 1} ⊂ {k + 1, . . . , 2k + 1} then on the odd graph of order k there is an edge connecting the vertices V1 and V 2 (that represent the partitions A1 (20) and A2 (28), respectively). We show that there is a heteroclinic connection from the ab cluster state with partition A1 to the cd cluster state with partition A2 and that there is a connection from the cd cluster state with partition A2 to the ab cluster state with the same partition. Thus one may navigate from the ab cluster state with partition A1 to the ab cluster state with partition A2 through the cd cluster state with partition A2. Thus, we are interested in parameter regions where A, B and C hold: A There exist two different cluster states in the subspace (21) such that [ ψ1, ψ2 ] = Ω t + [ a, b ] , [ ψ1, ψ2 ] = Ω t + [ c, d ] , (30) that are both [ k, k + 1 ] cluster states with partition A1 (20). They are called ab and cd cluster states and by dropping the Ω t we loosely say that in a ab cluster state k oscillators have phase a and k + 1 oscillators have phase b while in a cd cluster state k oscillators have phase c and k + 1 oscillators have phase d. Indeed, only the phase differences φab = a − b , φcd = c − d , (31) can be determined from (23) and by symmetry, such periodic orbits exist for all other [ k, k + 1 ] cluster states with different partitions (e.g. with A2 (28)). B We require that the ab cluster states are unstable to perturbations of the larger cluster of b-s and the cd cluster states are unstable to perturbation of the smaller cluster of c-s while all other perturbations decay. This can be characterised in saying that we wish to ﬁnd α, r such that for ab cluster states we have λ2 < 0, λ3 < 0, λ4 > 0 while for cd cluster states we have λ2 < 0, λ3 > 0, λ4 < 0; see (24) and (25). 44 P. Ashwin et al. C We wish to ﬁnd a subregion of A, B in parameter space such that there is a heteroclinic connection from the ab cluster state with partition A1 (20) to the cd cluster state with partition A2 (28) and a heteroclinic connection from the cd cluster state with partition A2 to the ab cluster state with partition A2. Steps A, B above are routine in terms of root ﬁnding and then evaluating the stabilities but step C is more complex. Note that (similarly to the N = 4 case in Fig. 4a) there is an additional [ k, k + 1 ] cluster state in the subspace (21) but that is unstable against tangential perturbations (λ2 > 0) and hence does not appear in the heteroclinic network. First let us search for the ab → cd heteroclinic connection by examining the partition B1 = {{1, . . . , k}, {k + 1}, {k + 2, . . . , 2k + 1}} , (32) that corresponds to (by abuse of notation) [ b1, bs, b2 ] = [ k, 1, k ]. Deﬁning the cluster phases as ψ1: = θ1 = . . . = θk , ψs: = θk+1 , ψ2: = θk+2 = . . . = θ2k+1 , leads to ˙ψ1 = ω + 1 N ˙ψs = ω + 1 N ˙ψ2 = ω + 1 N (cid:6) (cid:5) b1 g(0) + bs g(ψ1 − ψs) + b2 g(ψ1 − ψ2) (cid:6) (cid:5) b1 g(ψs − ψ1) + bs g(0) + b2 g(ψs − ψ2) (cid:5) b1 g(ψ2 − ψ1) + bs g(ψ2 − ψs) + b2 g(0) , (cid:6) , , (33) (34) see (8). Notice that for ψs = ψ2 one obtains a [k, k + 1] cluster state with partition A1 (20) and (21), While for ψs = ψ1 a[k, k + 1] cluster state with partition A2 (28) and (29) is obtained. One can numerically verify that there exists a heteroclinic connection between the ab cluster state [ ψ1, ψs, ψ2 ] = Ω t + [ a, b, b ] and the cd cluster state [ ψ1, ψs, ψ2 ] = Ω t + [ d, d, c ]. Figure 6 shows such connections for k = 10 (N = 21) with parameters α = 1.52 and r = 0.1. To eliminate Ω t the phase differences ψ1 − ψs and ψs − ψ2 are used. Now let us search for the cd → ab connection by examining the partition B2 = {{k + 2, . . . , 2k}, {2k + 1}, {1, . . . , k + 1}} , (35) that corresponds to [ ˜b1, ˜bs, ˜b2 ] = [ k − 1, 1, k + 1 ]. Now deﬁning the cluster phases as Heteroclinic Switching in Coupled Oscillator Networks 45 ψ1 − ψs φab φcd ψs − ψ2 ˜ψ2 − ˜ψs 2π − φcd 2π −φab ˜ψs − ˜ψ1 Fig. 6 Heteroclinic connections (thick curves) connecting ab and cd cluster states (dots) for k = 10 (N = 21). The ﬁgure shows that one may navigate from the ab cluster state with partition A1 (20) to the ab cluster state with partition A2 (28) through the cd cluster state with partition A2, that is, the sequence of connections ab → cd → ab corresponds to an edge between the vertices V 1 and V 2 (representing A1 and A2) on the odd graph of order k, see Fig. 5. Additional trajectories (thin curves) demonstrate that the connections are attracting, that is, the heteroclinic connections are sinks within the relevant subspaces. The parameters are α = 1.52 and r = 0.1 correspond to the cross in Fig. 7d ˜ψ1: = θk+2 = . . . = θ2k , ˜ψs: = θ2k+1 , ˜ψ2: = θ1 = . . . = θk+1 . (36) leads to the same set of equations as (34) for ˜ψp-s but with the current set of ˜bp-s. Note that for ˜ψs = ˜ψ1 a [ k, k + 1 ] cluster state is obtained with partition A2 (28) and (29). We can numerically verify that there exist heteroclinic connections between the cd cluster state [ ˜ψ1, ˜ψs, ˜ψ2 ] = Ω t+[ c, c, d ] and the ab cluster state [ ˜ψ1, ˜ψs, ˜ψ2 ] = Ω t + [ a, a, b ] as shown in Fig. 6 for k = 10 (N = 21) with parameters α = 1.52, r = 0.1. Now the phase differences ˜ψs − ˜ψ1 and ˜ψ2 − ˜ψs are used to represent the connection. Note that in Fig. 6 only the plane spanned by ψ1 − ψs and ψs − ψ2 and 46 0.2 r 0.15 IV 0.1 II k = 2, (N = 5) k = 3, (N = 7) (a) 0.2 III r (b) P. Ashwin et al. 0.15 0.1 0.05 0 1.2 IV II 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 α 0.05 0 I 0 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 α 0.2 r 0.15 0.1 0.05 k = 5, (N = 11) k = 10, (N = 21) III IV 0 II I (c) 0.2 r 0.15 0.1 0.05 III II (d) IV 0 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 α 0 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 α 0.2 r 0.15 0.1 0.05 k = 20, (N = 41) III (e) 0 II IV I 0.2 r 0.15 0.1 0.05 k = 30, (N = 61) (f) III II IV 0 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 α 0 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 α Fig. 7 In (α, r) parameter space the white region IV shows where the N = 2k + 1 oscillator system (1, 2) has a heteroclinic network between [ k, k+1 ] cluster states with the structure of the odd graph of order k for (a) k = 2, (b) k = 3, (c) k = 5, (d) k = 10, (e) k = 20 and (f) k = 30. The other regions indicated are as follows. Dark grey region 0 – neither cluster state exists; light green region I – only ab cluster states exist; and light blue region II – only cd cluster states exist; red region III – both type of cluster states exist but connections are missing. Note that the white region is open (conﬁrming that the cycle is robust) but becomes smaller and moves towards (α, r) = (π/2, 0) on increasing k. The cross in panel (d) corresponds to the simulation in Fig. 6 Heteroclinic Switching in Coupled Oscillator Networks 47 the plane spanned by ˜ψs − ˜ψ1 and ˜ψ2 − ˜ψs are used by the dynamics; the plane spanned by ψ1 − ψs and ˜ψs − ˜ψ1 is transverse to the dynamics. For values of parameters α, r and k where A, B hold one may run ﬁnite time simulations of system (34) and determine whether the above described ab → cd and cd → ab connections exist. In this way the existence of a heteroclinic network equivalent in structure to an odd graph of order k can be it veriﬁed numerically. This could in principle be done to a ﬁnite precision, provided that a bound on the errors is also calculated. In Fig. 7, a 100 × 100 mesh is used over the parameter regime α ∈ (1.2, 1.7), r ∈ (0, 0.2) and at each mesh-point it is checked whether the conditions A, B and C are satisﬁed for k ranging from k = 2 (N = 5) up to k = 30 (N = 61). Region IV (white) shows where A, B and C hold while region III (red) shows where only A, B hold but not C. Regions I (light green) and II (light blue) are where A, B are only partially satisﬁed, i.e. only ab or cd cluster states exist, respectively. Finally, considering parameters from region 0 (dark grey) no condition hold, that is no cluster states can be found. Observe that the white region IV shrinks as k increases. Although this is not a rigorous proof that the odd graph structure is present for arbitrary (ﬁnite) k, it does suggest a means of verifying this. It may be possible to analytically prove the existence of an open non-empty region in the (α, r) parameter plane satisfying A, B and C by using rigorous singular perturbation methods with a small parameter (cid:14) = 1/k. 5 Discussion We have shown that remarkably complicated bifurcations and structures may emerge in the dynamics of (1). In particular, robust heteroclinic networks can appear that lead to slow sequential switching between cluster states. We found that the number of oscillators needs to satisfy N ≥ 5 to give rise to nontrivial robust switching dynamics between cluster states. The reason for this is that 5 is the minimum number where there is a nontrivial asymmetric partition, namely a [2, 3] cluster state. Such a state has two clusters of differing size that can have different transverse stabilities, and this permits a nontrivial switching between different 2-cluster partitions. In gen- eral for N = 2k + 1 oscillators, we determined parameter regimes where [k, k + 1] cluster states are connected to form a heteroclinic network with the structure of an odd graph of order k. We remark that for N ≥ 7 the odd graph heteroclinic network is only a subnetwork of the full attracting heteroclinic network. The full network includes connections not just between cluster states of type [k, k + 1] but also between cluster states of type [k − 2m, k + 2m + 1] for a variety of m. Up to now we have only scratched the surface of the combinatorial complexity that may exist in such networks. We note that it is possible to ﬁnd rather different heteroclinic structures for a variety of different coupling functions. For example, considering 48 P. Ashwin et al. g(ϕ) = − sin (ϕ + α) + r sin (2ϕ + β) , (37) and N = 2k + 1 (N ≥ 5), it is possible to ﬁnd robust heteroclinic cycles between [k, k, 1] cluster states for open sets of parameters [5, 28, 34]. We also remark that (1) does not have any sort of variational structure or global Lyapunov function for general choices of g (although it may do for speciﬁc cases of interest [11]). Lack of variational structure is clearly a necessary condition for the existence of heteroclinic connections in the dynamics. On preserving the coupling structure but breaking the permutation symmetry by making the oscillators non-identical, the dynamics can still be efﬁciently explained with reference to the heteroclinic network [28, 34]. Moreover, for strong nonlinear coupling, one can explain extreme sensitivity to detuning of the frequencies of oscil- lators. This is where arbitrarily small differences in the frequencies give rise to loss of frequency locking and this depends apparently on the presence of robust hetero- clinic attractors that are topologically non-trivial on TN [4]. On breaking the sym- metry of coupling structure by removing connections, the dynamics can be much more rich; see, for example [13, 30] and references within. However, heteroclinic connections between unstable states may still exist even when the coupling is not all-to-all leading to sequential switching [1, 20]. The switching dynamics occurring in networks provides some promising mod- els for a variety of phenomena, especially for neural applications where synchrony tends to be frustrated due to the competing requirements of efﬁciency (a neural code needs a minimum of energy to be maintained) and robustness (a neural code should be insensitive to removal or malfunction of individual cells). Particular applications that may be of relevance to the models presented here include ﬁnite-state computa- tion [2] and spatio-temporal code generation [28, 34].

We review recent advances on the dynamics of ﬁnite-size particles advected by chaotic ﬂuid ﬂows, focusing on the phenomena caused by the inertia of ﬁnite-size particles which have no counterpart in traditionally studied passive tracers. Particle inertia enlarges the phase space and makes the advection dynamics much richer than the passive tracer dynamics, because particles’ trajectories can diverge from the trajectories of ﬂuid parcels. We cover both conﬁned and open ﬂow regimes, and we also discuss the dynamics of interacting particles, which can undergo fragmentation and coagulation. 1 Introduction and Overview A correct formulation of the problem of the motion of ﬁnite-size particles in ﬂuid ﬂows has presented difﬁcult challenges for generations of ﬂuid dynamicists. Although in principle this problem is “just” another application of the Navier– Stokes equation, with moving boundary conditions, a direct solution of the ﬂuid dynamical equations is not only very difﬁcult, but also not very illuminating. So from the nineteenth century onwards efforts were made to ﬁnd the appropriate approximations which allow one to write the equations of motion of small rigid particles in a given ﬂow in the form of ordinary differential equations, regarding the ﬂow’s velocity ﬁeld as given. Some very subtle issues are involved in making the right kinds of approximations and assumptions in a self-consistent way, and a number of incorrect results appeared in the early literature. The issue was ﬁnally resolved when Maxey and Riley [1] wrote down the equations of motion for a small spherical rigid particle advected by a (smooth) ﬂow and Auton et al. [2], following Taylor’s work [3], corrected the form of the added-mass term. The Maxey-Riley equations allow the global dynamics of a single advected ﬁnite- size particle to be investigated with the techniques of dynamical systems theory. The dynamics of advected particles in ﬂuid ﬂows have been a favourite subject of investigation of chaos and related complex dynamical regimes since the pioneering work of Aref [4], but all the early works assumed that the particles’ size and their inertia could be neglected – the passive tracer assumption. Finite size results in inertia, which introduces a new richness to the dynamics, since ﬁnite-size particles are no longer enslaved to the motion of the ﬂow surrounding them – they have their own dynamics, distinct from that of the ﬂuid. A whole new world of challenges and possibilities opens up to dynamicists once ﬁnite size and inertia are considered. This gives this subject a great importance from the theoretical point of view alone; not to mention its practical importance: polluting particles suspended in the atmosphere and plankton organisms ﬂoating in the ocean are just a few of the systems whose understanding involves the theory of the dynamics of ﬁnite-size particles in complex ﬂows. This chapter presents an overview of the subject of the dynamics of ﬁnite-size particles in chaotic ﬂows, focusing on a few chosen topics of current research. The choice of topics reﬂects the authors’ own research interests; we make no apologies for that: we in no way claim this to be an exhaustive review on this area. But we do think the topics we cover here give the reader a good idea of what is going on in this exciting area of research. We ﬁrst introduce the Maxey-Riley equation in Sect. 2. Its assumptions and range of validity are discussed, as well as some of its basic consequences; but we do not show the derivations. The dynamics of ﬁnite-size particles can often be understood by using the simpler dynamics of passive tracers as a starting point. In Sect. 3 we discuss the chaotic advection of non-inertial tracers, and also introduce some of the ﬂows which will be used as examples in later sections. The dynamics of non-interacting ﬁnite-size particles is the subject of Sects. 4 and 5. Section 4 deals with conﬁned ﬂows, whereas Sect. 5 focuses on open ﬂows. These two kinds of ﬂow have very different long-time behaviours, which lead to quite distinct particle dynamics. In these sections, we focus especially on the new phenomena caused by the particles’ inertia, which are not present in the case of passive tracers. The challenging and very important topic of interacting ﬁnite-size particles is covered by Sect. 6, which reviews recent results on the processes of fragmentation and coagulation of ﬁnite-size particles. Finally, in Sect. 7, we make some remarks on the future directions of this research area. 2 Motion of Finite-Size Particles in Fluid Flows When studying the motion of particles advected by ﬂuid ﬂows, it is commonly assumed that one can consider the particles as passive tracers, with negligible mass and size. This amounts to neglecting the particles’ inertia, and assuming that they take on the velocity of the surrounding ﬂuid, instantaneously adapting to any changes in the ﬂuid velocity. If u is the (possibly time-dependent) ﬂuid’s velocity Dynamics of Finite-Size Particles in Chaotic Fluid Flows 53 ﬁeld, and denoting by r(t) the position of a particle, the passive tracer assumption implies that r satisﬁes the differential equation: ˙r(t) = u(r(t),t). (1) The passive tracer assumption is extensively used in ﬂuid dynamics [5, 6], and it is a good approximation in a number of cases. There are many situations, however, where it does not apply, and we need to take into account the fact that particles have ﬁnite sizes and masses (for reviews see [7–9]). Finite-size particles are not able to adjust their velocities instantaneously to that of the ﬂuid, and in addition their density may be different from that of the ﬂuid. Therefore, in general the particle velocity differs from the ﬂuid velocity. This means that the dynamics of ﬁnite-size particles is far richer and more complex than that of passive tracers. 2.1 The Maxey-Riley Equation In order to study the dynamics of ﬁnite-size particles advected by chaotic ﬂows, we need to have a simple formulation of the equations of motion of the advected parti- cles. The problem is that ﬁnite-size particles are actually extended objects with their own boundaries. The rigorous way to analyse their dynamics would involve solving the Navier–Stokes equation for moving boundaries, with all the complications this implies. The partial differential equations resulting from this approach would be very difﬁcult to solve and analyse; and as dynamicists, we would like to have the particle’s motion described by ordinary differential equations, similar to Eq. (1). Fortunately, an approximate differential equation for the motion of small spherical particles in ﬂows may be written down [1, 2]. If a particle has radius a and mass mp, its motion is given to a good approximation by the Maxey-Riley equation: (cid:13) ˙v − D Dt u(r(t),t) − 1 2 mp ˙v = mf D Dt (cid:15)(cid:16) mf (cid:14) u(r(t),t) + 1 a2∇2u(r(t),t) 10 (cid:17) dτ dq(τ )/dτ π ν(t − τ ) √ t , 0 −6π aρf νq(t) + (mp − mf )g − 6π a2ρf ν (2) where q(t) ≡ v(t) − u(r(t),t) − 1 6 a2∇2u. Here r(t) and v(t) ≡ dr(t)/dt are the position and velocity of the particle, respec- tively, and u(r,t) is the undisturbed ﬂow ﬁeld at the location of the particle. mf denotes the mass of the ﬂuid displaced by the particle, and ν is the kinematic vis- cosity of the ﬂuid of density ρf ; g is the gravitational acceleration. The derivative Du Dt = ∂u ∂t + (u · ∇)u (3) 54 J.H.E. Cartwright et al. is the total hydrodynamical derivative, taken along the path of a ﬂuid element, whereas du dt = ∂u ∂t + (v · ∇)u (4) is taken along the particle’s trajectory. The ﬁrst term on the right-hand side is the acceleration of the ﬂuid element in position r(t) at time t and represents the force exerted on the particle by the undis- turbed ﬂuid. The second term represents the added-mass effect, which accounts for the fact that when the particle moves relative to the ﬂuid, it displaces a certain amount of ﬂuid with it; the result is that the particle behaves as if it had additional mass. The third and fourth terms represent the Stokes drag caused by the ﬂuid’s viscosity and the buoyancy force, respectively. The integral is called the Basset- Boussinesq history term, and arises from the fact that the vorticity diffuses away from the particle due to viscosity [10, 11]. The terms involving the factor a2∇2u are the so-called Faxén corrections [94], and they account for the spatial variation of the ﬂow ﬁeld across the particle. Equation (2) is valid for small particles at low particle Reynolds numbers Rep. This Reynolds number is calculated by using the particle size as the length scale, and the relative velocity between particle and neighbouring ﬂuid as the velocity scale: Rep = a|v − u|/ν. This implies that for Eq. (2) to be a valid approximation, the initial velocity difference between particle and ﬂuid must be small [1]. Another condition is that the velocity difference across the particle – more precisely, the shear Reynolds number ReΓ = a2Γ /ν (cid:21) 1, where Γ is the typical velocity gradient in the ﬂow – must be small [1]. If the typical length over which the velocity ﬁeld changes appreciably is much larger than the particle radius a, the Faxén corrections can be neglected. Since the Basset-Boussinesq history term also describes the effect of viscosity (just like the Stokes drag), in a minimal model it can also be neglected. These approximations simplify tremendously the equations of motion. The history term would be espe- cially problematic to analyse, since it depends on the entire past history of the particle, and it means the dynamics described by Eq. (2) has an inﬁnite-dimensional phase-space. By neglecting it, Eq. (2) is an ordinary differential equation (and not an integro-differential equation), which can be studied with the techniques presently available to dynamical systems theory. Using these approximations, we redeﬁne the variables by r → rL, v → vU, u → uU, t → L U t, where L and U are the typical length and velocity scales of the ﬂow. The new vari- ables are all dimensionless. In these new variables, we get the following dimension- less equation of motion: ¨r(t) = 1 St (u(r(t),t) − ˙r(t) + Wn) + 3 2 R D Dt u(r(t),t), (5) Dynamics of Finite-Size Particles in Chaotic Fluid Flows 55 where n is a vertical unit vector pointing downwards, and the dimensionless param- eters are −1 = St 6π aρf νL (cid:12) (cid:11) mp + 1 2 mf U , R = mf mp + 1 2 mf , W = mp − mf 6π aνρf U g, (6) with g = |g|. The parameter St measures the damping intensity and is called the Stokes number, the dimensionless decay time in the velocity difference between particle and ﬂuid due to the Stokes drag. The limit of St → 0 corresponds to the case of point particles with no inertia (since mf and mp are proportional to a3). It is in this limit that the passive tracer equation (1) holds. R is the mass ratio parameter. R < 2 3 corresponds to aerosols (particles heavier than the ﬂuid), and R > 2 3 corresponds to bubbles (particles lighter than the ﬂuid). W is the scaled particle settling velocity for still ﬂuid. Note that W/St is the dimensionless buoyancy force, which is independent of the particle size. Unless otherwise noted, we shall use Eq. (5) for the remainder of this work to describe the dynamics of ﬁnite-size particles. 2.2 General Features of the Dynamics of Finite-Size Particles Finite-size particles have very different dynamics from that of passive tracers, which follow the same dynamics as ﬂuid parcels. Mathematically, this is expressed by the fact that Eq. (5) is a second-order differential equation, compared with Eq. (1) which is of ﬁrst order. An immediate consequence of this is that the ﬁnite-size dynamics given by Eq. (5) possesses a 2n-dimensional phase-space, where n is the dimension of the conﬁguration space. Thus, in a planar ﬂow a ﬁnite-size particle is described by a dynamical system with four degrees of freedom. In contrast, for non-inertial particle dynamics the phase-space is two-dimensional. Another difference is that the ﬁnite-size dynamics is dissipative, even in incom- pressible ﬂows, and the phase-space volume contracts at the rate n/St, which is always positive. Contrast this to the non-inertial case, in which the phase-space vol- ume coincides with the spatial volume, which renders the dynamics conservative for incompressible ﬂows. The dissipative character of the ﬁnite-size dynamics raises the possibility of the existence of attractors in phase-space, which is not possible in the non-inertial case. This has crucial consequences for the global dynamics of particles in chaotic ﬂows, as we shall see in later sections. The density of an advected particle relative to the surrounding ﬂuid plays a cru- cial role in its dynamics. This is incorporated in the parameter R in Eq. (5). Using a perturbative analysis valid in the limit of small particle sizes, Maxey has shown [12] that if particles have higher density than the ﬂuid (aerosols, with R < 2 3 ), they tend to move away from regions of high vorticity, such as the centres of eddies. This effect can be intuitively understood as the result of a centrifugal force acting on the particle and pushing it away from a highly-rotating region. Conversely, particles with lower density than the ﬂuid (bubbles, with R > 2 3 ) tend to move towards high-vorticity regions. So bubbles tend to agglomerate in the centres of vortices. These effects are totally absent in the non-inertial case. 56 J.H.E. Cartwright et al. 3 Chaotic Advection of Passive Tracers In order to understand properly the dynamics of ﬁnite-size particles in chaotic ﬂows, we must ﬁrst understand the simpler dynamics of passive tracers. In this section we review passive advection of particles from the viewpoint of dynamical-systems theory. In the approximation of passive advection, the particles are considered to be massless and of negligible size. They take on the velocity of the ﬂuid ﬂow instan- taneously, and their motion is given by Eq. (1). The ﬂows we shall consider here are typically laminar, i.e., the velocity ﬁeld u is assumed to be smooth, although time-dependent. We brieﬂy discuss the case of turbulent ﬂows in the concluding

Section. 3.1 Properties of Passive-Tracer Chaotic Advection The velocity ﬁeld of the ﬂuid, described by the right-hand side of (1), is typically a non-linear function of the position and time. This implies that even if the ﬂow itself is relatively simple and non-turbulent, the solutions of (1) can become chaotic, a phenomenon named chaotic advection by Aref [4]. This is an essential difference between the Eulerian description of ﬂuid motion, which is concerned with the prop- erties of the velocity ﬁeld of the ﬂuid, and the Lagrangian description, which is concerned with the trajectories of the ﬂuid elements. It is argued in [13] that the advection in any ﬂow with a ﬂuid Reynolds number high enough to generate a time dependent velocity ﬁeld around an obstacle displays chaos. The stretching and folding action of the chaotic dynamics acting on a set of initial conditions in the phase space, which coincides with the conﬁguration space, can be seen directly through the behaviour of a blob of dye injected into the ﬂuid. As a Fig. 1 Surface patterns downstream of the ﬂow-through of a power plant. Loch Faskally, Scotland, photo taken by Gy. Károlyi. The scale is approximately 2 m Dynamics of Finite-Size Particles in Chaotic Fluid Flows 57 result, an initially compact blob of particles will trace out a complex ﬁlamentary structure; a real-world example is shown in Fig. 1. In most examples in the area of dynamical systems, these complex patterns are hidden in a high-dimensional abstract phase space; here they become visible to the naked eye, and can be pho- tographed in experiments [14, 15]. We assume throughout this work that the ﬂuid is incompressible. As a con- sequence, the motion of passively advected particles is volume preserving, hence the motion of passive tracers is similar to Hamiltonian dynamics, where the phase space volume is conserved during motion [16]. This property is unique to passively advected particles. Advection in two-dimensional (r = (x,y), u = (ux,uy)) and incompressible ﬂows represents an important subclass of chaotic advection systems. Incompressibility implies that there exists a stream function Ψ (x,y,t) so that the velocity components can be written as ux(x,y,t) = − ∂Ψ (x,y,t) ∂y , uy(x,y,t) = ∂Ψ (x,y,t) ∂x . (7) Substituting this into (1) we obtain the equation of motion for a particle advected in 2D in terms of the stream function: dx dt = − ∂Ψ (x,y,t) ∂y , dy dt = ∂Ψ (x,y,t) ∂x . (8) These equations have a clear Hamiltonian structure, variable x playing the role of the position, y playing the role of the conjugate momentum, and Ψ (x,y,t) playing the role of the Hamiltonian function [17, 18]. If the ﬂow is stationary, that is, the stream function Ψ does not depend explicitly on time, the particle trajectories coincide with the level curves of Ψ , called stream- lines [17, 18]. From a dynamical point of view, passive advection in a stationary, incompressible 2D ﬂow is a one-degree-of-freedom Hamiltonian system, which is always integrable. In most realistic situations, however, Ψ is not independent of time, in which case we have a one-degree-of-freedom system with a time-dependent Hamiltonian. Such driven systems typically exhibit chaotic motion [19, 20]: the advected particles move in an unpredictable way and display a great sensitivity to initial conditions. Even a very simple time dependence, for example periodicity, is enough to generate chaotic particle motion: no turbulence is necessary for complex particle trajectories. This phenomenon is often called Lagrangian turbulence, in contrast to the spatiotemporal complexity of a ﬂow ﬁeld, which is referred to as

Eulerian turbulence. Flows can be divided into two main classes: they can be either open or closed. A ﬂow is closed if it is conﬁned within a bounded domain. A ﬂow is consid- ered open if there is a net current ﬂowing through the region of observation and if ﬂuid elements cannot return there from the outﬂow region. A typical example of closed ﬂow is mixing in a batch reactor without in- or outﬂow; an example of an open ﬂow is the ﬂuid motion in a channel or river in the presence of an 58 J.H.E. Cartwright et al. obstacle. In open ﬂows, most trajectories are unbounded, and most particles escape the observation region in a ﬁnite time. In closed ﬂows, the particles cannot escape the bounded region. Therefore chaotic behaviour, if it occurs, is persistent in closed ﬂows. Such ﬂows reveal structures commonly found in usual Hamiltonian systems, with chaotic regions coexisting with regular islands. Advected particles, if they start from an initial position in the chaotic region, roam the whole chaotic region, whereas particles within a regular island remain inside forever. The boundaries of these islands, formed by Kolmogorov-Arnold-Moser (KAM) tori, are impene- trable to outside particles. In the chaotic regions, particles initiated close to each other deviate exponentially along the unstable foliation of unstable ﬁxed points. This unstable foliation is dense in the chaotic regions, and governs the stretch- ing and folding of dye blobs. When stretching of a dye blob starts, a ﬁlamentary structure emerges, which becomes space-ﬁlling in the limit of long times. Thus, persistent chaos and transient ﬁlamentary structures are features found in closed ﬂows. The chaotic motion of passively advected particles in open ﬂows takes a differ- ent form. Typical particles escape the observation region in ﬁnite time, but there is a fractal set of particle trajectories conﬁned within a ﬁnite region, e.g. in the vicinity of the wake in a ﬂow around an obstacle. These non-escaping orbits form a non-attracting chaotic set, a chaotic saddle [19, 20], which governs the motion of particles in its vicinity. This chaotic set, although it consists of unstable orbits and has measure zero, gives rise to extreme sensitivity of the dynamics to initial conditions. The stable manifold of the chaotic saddle separates the initial condi- tions leading to different ﬁnal states of the particles (such as where they leave the region of observation). The unstable manifold of the chaotic saddle is traced out by the particles that spend long times in the vicinity of the saddle. Because the unstable manifold is a ﬁlamentary fractal, the pattern traced out by a blob of dye takes on a complex shape, shadowing the fractal structure of the unstable mani- fold. Advection thus leads to transient chaos owing to particles leaving the region of observation, and to persistent ﬁlamentary structures traced out by the advected particles. In the following subsections some paradigmatic ﬂows, both open and closed, are reviewed. These ﬂows will be used later to illustrate the motion of ﬁnite-size particles. 3.2 The Convection and Cellular Flow Models The convection ﬂow is a simple two-dimensional incompressible ﬂow represent- ing vortices or roll cells with oscillating velocity magnitude. It was introduced by Chandrasekhar [21] as a solution to the Bénard problem and has been used since then in many studies involving active and passive particles [22, 23]. The ﬂow is deﬁned on a unit cell, but one may study the motion of ﬁnite-size particles on an inﬁnite spatial domain using periodic boundary conditions. The convection ﬂow is particularly interesting to investigate the principles of particle motion in the ocean and in the atmosphere since it contains both vortices (convection cells) and linear Dynamics of Finite-Size Particles in Chaotic Fluid Flows 59 uprising/sinking regions, and can hence be considered as an idealisation of realistic atmospheric and oceanic ﬂows. The ﬂow is given by the stream function ψ(x,y,t) = [1 + B sin (ωt)] 1 k sin (kx) sin (ky). (9) Here it is assumed that the characteristic velocity U0 = 1 and the characteristic length scale of the ﬂow L = 1, and we set k = 2π accordingly. The parameters B and ω denote the amplitude and the frequency of the oscillation of the vortical velocity magnitude, respectively. A special feature of the ﬂow described by Eq. (9) it that the non-inertial advection dynamics remains nonchaotic even in the time-dependent case. In this ﬂow chaotic advection can only be the consequence of ﬁnite-size effects. To illustrate the ﬂow ﬁeld we show a snapshot of the velocity ﬁeld in Fig. 2. This ﬂow ﬁeld with the parameters B = 2.72, ω = π is used later for all results concerning coagulation and fragmentation processes (cf. Sect. 6). We also consider a slightly modiﬁed version of the convection ﬂow, the cellular ﬂow model. This is a two-dimensional incompressible ﬂow representing a lattice of oscillating vortices or roll cells. The ﬂow is deﬁned by the stream function ψ(x,y,t) = 1 k cos (kx + B sin (ωt)) cos (ky). (10) The ﬂow is deﬁned in the x,y ∈ [ − π/2,π/2] domain with periodic boundary conditions, and k is set to 1. Let us ﬁrst consider the simplest case where the time dependence is suppressed, by setting B = 0. Thence ψ is a constant of motion, which implies that real ﬂuid elements follow trajectories that are level curves of ψ. This is illustrated in Fig. 3a. For B (cid:6)= 0, the equations of motion for ﬂuid element or passive tracer are given by (7) and the trajectories differ from the streamlines. An example is shown in Fig. 3b, where the Poincaré section of the particle motion is illustrated. The positions of many particles are plotted at integer multiples of the ﬂow period. Some of the 1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 y 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 x Fig. 2 Snapshot of the velocity ﬁeld of the convection ﬂow at t = 0 computed from the stream function (9) 60 J.H.E. Cartwright et al. (a) (b) Fig. 3 The cellular ﬂow, Eq.(10). ( a) The passively advected particles exhibit regular motion if the ﬂow is time-independent (B = 0, k = 1). The trajectories of 30 particles with randomly selected initial positions are shown. (b) Chaotic behaviour in the time-dependent ﬂow (B = 0.3, k = 1, ω = 2.72224). Snapshots of 200 particles with randomly selected initial conditions are shown at integer multiples of the ﬂow’s period passively advected particles exhibit regular motion; they trace out the closed curves visible in the ﬁgure. The rest of the particles ﬁll out the chaotic region. This makes the cellular ﬂow different from the convective ﬂow in that the passive particle motion in the cellular ﬂow, due to the oscillating vortex centres, can be chaotic for B (cid:6)= 0. 3.3 The Von Kármán Vortex Street The open ﬂow around an obstacle is a classical problem in ﬂuid mechanics [14, 24]. We consider a viscous incompressible ﬂow around a cylinder of radius R0. Far away from the obstacle the ﬂow is expected to be uniform. We label the longitudinal ﬂow direction by x, and the transverse direction by y. Denoting by U the velocity for x → ±∞, the Reynolds number associated with this ﬂow can be deﬁned as Re = 2R0U/ν, (11) where ν is the ﬂuid’s kinematic viscosity. For Re sufﬁciently small, the ﬂow is sta- tionary. When Re passes a critical value Rec ≈ 80, the stationary solution of the Navier-Stokes equation becomes unstable, and the ﬂow becomes time-periodic with some period T. Vortices are created in the wake of the cylinder, detach from it and drift down- stream. They gradually weaken owing to the viscosity, until after some distance they vanish. New vortices are shed from the surface of the cylinder at intervals of half a Dynamics of Finite-Size Particles in Chaotic Fluid Flows 61 Fig. 4 Streamlines for the ﬂow around a cylinder at two different times, separated by one quarter of the full period T of the ﬂow. The vortex shedding is clearly visible period T/2, alternately above and below the middle of the cylinder (see Fig. 4). By this process, a von Kármán vortex street is formed behind the cylinder. For simplic- ity we assume that the lifetime of each detached vortex equals one period T. An analytical model for the ﬂow in the von Kármán vortex street has been pro- posed [25, 26], which ﬁts well the results of the direct numerical calculation for Re = 250 [27]. In this model, the stream function ψ(x,y,t) is explicitly given, and we shall use this kinematic model in what follows. This model serves thus as an ideal paradigm for a large class of open chaotic ﬂows and has been widely used to study different aspects of transient chaotic advection (see e.g., [28–30]). The stream function ψ(x,y,t) can be directly used in Eq. (1) to ﬁnd the motion of passively advected particles in the von Kármán ﬂow by numerical integration. To appreciate the importance of the unstable manifold of the chaotic saddle, we place a dye droplet of particles upstream into the ﬂow and follow the deformation of the shape of this droplet. Assume that the initial droplet overlaps with the stable mani- fold of the saddle. Particles that fall exactly on the stable manifold hit the saddle and never leave it. Neighbouring points, however, only approach the saddle; they stay 62 J.H.E. Cartwright et al. in its neighbourhood for a while, but sooner or later they leave the wake along the unstable manifold. Thus, we conclude that tracer particles that do not leave a region of observation in the wake too rapidly, must trace out the unstable manifold. In other words, the unstable manifold of the chaotic saddle is a “quasi-attractor” of the tracer dynamics: particles accumulate on it while being advected away. In numerical simulations with a ﬁnite number of particles, the manifold serves as a (periodically moving) template, which becomes gradually emptied as more and more particles escape through the outﬂow. Figure 5 shows the evolution of a droplet in the von Kármán ﬂow. First the droplet becomes stretched and folded and later it becomes clear that it traces out a moving fractal object, the unstable manifold. Though a few particles are still visible, the region is almost emptied in the last panel; this is a consequence of the ﬁnite number of particles used in the simulation. Note that the von Kármán vortex street is not a particular property of cylindrical obstacles. Most (approximately) two-dimensional ﬂows past an obstacle have this property, provided that their Reynolds number is in the appropriate range. Thus, von Kármán vortices are found in many real situations [31–33]. y y y y 1 0 −1 1 0 −1 1 0 −1 1 0 −1 −2 0 −2 0 −2 0 −2 0 2 x 2 x 2 x 2 x t = 0 4 6 t = 0.6 4 6 t = 1.4 4 6 t = 2.0 y y y y 1 0 −1 1 0 −1 1 0 −1 1 0 −1 −2 0 −2 0 −2 0 4 6 −2 0 2 x 2 x 2 x 2 x t = 0.4 4 6 t = 1.0 4 6 t = 1.6 4 6 t = 4.0 4 6 Fig. 5 Time evolution of a droplet of 20,000 tracers in the von Kármán ﬂow shown at different dimensionless times t Dynamics of Finite-Size Particles in Chaotic Fluid Flows 63 4 Inertial Effects in Closed Chaotic Flows The most general description of the dynamics of ﬁnite-size particles presents an enormous richness of phenomena (see, for example, [7, 9, 34–40]). It is character- istic of the dynamics that invariant surfaces in the model without inertia are bro- ken up. For example, as shown for aerosols in Fig. 6, the particles accumulate on higher dimensional attractors instead of being conﬁned by the closed curves shown in Fig. 3b. Figure 6 shows the 2D projection of the attractor located in the four- dimensional phase space of the particle dynamics. That the invariant curves no longer exist for inertial, ﬁnite-size particles is con- ﬁrmed in Fig. 7. Here, the periodic boundary conditions have been removed from the cellular ﬂow, and the particles are allowed to ﬂy out of the x,y ∈ [ − π/2,π/2] domain. For passive advection (not shown), the y = ±π/2 lines are impenetrable invariant curves; the advected particles can only leave the x,y ∈ [−π/2,π/2] domain in the x direction. As shown in Fig. 7 the invariant curves y = ±π/2 do not exist for aerosols, which can ﬂy out in the y direction as well. In the time-independent case, what were invariant surfaces in the model without inertia are transformed into spirals, owing to centrifugal forces: outward spirals for aerosols and inward spirals for bubbles. As a consequence, heavy particles tend to accumulate at the separatrices of the ﬂow. For large densities ρp (cid:22) ρf , particles are no longer conﬁned within vortices. Stokes drag is the most important force acting in this case, since the added-mass term becomes negligible as R → 0 in this limit (see Eq. (6)) and gravity is not acting on the horizontal plane. So to a ﬁrst approximation Eq. (5) transforms into Fig. 6 Aerosols (R = 0.5, St−1 = 0.04) followed in the cellular ﬂow. The particle positions are shown at integer multiples of the ﬂow’s period after 10 periods. The parameters of the ﬂow are the same as those in Fig. 3b J.H.E. Cartwright et al. 64 Fig. 7 Aerosols (R = 0.5, St−1 = 0.04) followed in the cellular ﬂow without periodic boundary conditions. All particles are initiated within the x,y ∈ [ − π/2, π/2] domain. The particle positions are shown at integer multiples of the ﬂow’s period. The parameters of the ﬂow are the same as those in Fig. 3b y 4 3 2 1 0 –1 –2 –3 –4 –4 –3 –2 –1 d2x dt2 d2y dt2 = −St−1 = −St−1 (cid:13) (cid:13) dx dt dy dt (cid:16) − ux(x,y,t) (cid:16) − uy(x,y,t) 0 x , , 1 2 3 4 (12) (13) and the Stokes number can be written as St −1 = 9νρf L 2a2ρpU . To derive this we used mp = 4 3 π a3ρp (cid:22) mf in Eq. (6). This is a highly-dissipative and singular perturbation of a Hamiltonian system, with a four-dimensional phase space: ˙x = px, ˙px = −St ˙y = py, ˙py = −St −1(px − ux(x,y,t)), −1(py − uy(x,y,t)). (14) (15) (16) (17) In the time-dependent case, particles tend to accumulate on a chaotic attractor of the high-dimensional phase space. As the upper panel of Fig. 8 shows for the cellular ﬂow (9), the projection of the attractor on the plane of the ﬂuid lies within the chaotic regions of the model ﬂow without inertia. The relative velocity ﬂuctuates Dynamics of Finite-Size Particles in Chaotic Fluid Flows 65 Fig. 8 Above: dense particles converge to fractal structures around a separatrix of the ﬂow given by Eq. (10) in the time-independent case. Below: in the large inertia limit, the relative velocity of particle and ﬂow ﬂuctuates chaotically, in a Brownian-like fashion chaotically, due to macroscopic, non-turbulent ﬂuctuations, that act to give the parti- cles deterministic but Brownian-like motion, illustrated in the lower panel of Fig. 8. 4.1 Neutrally Buoyant Particles Let us now consider whether even in the most favourable case of neutral buoyancy a ﬁnite-sized tracer particle remains always close to a ﬂow trajectory [41]. With this in mind, we set ρp = ρf in Eqs. (5) and (6), which corresponds to setting W = 0 and R = 2/3: dv dt = Du Dt − St −1 (v − u) . (18) 66 J.H.E. Cartwright et al. In the past it has been assumed that neutrally buoyant particles have trivial dynamics (e.g., [34, 42]), and the mathematical argument used to back this up is that if we make the approximation Du/Dt = du/dt, which can be seen as a rescaling of the added mass, the problem becomes very simple Thence (v − u) = −St −1(v − u). d dt v − u = (v0 − u0) exp (− St −1 t), (19) (20) from which we would infer that even if we release the particle with a different initial velocity v0 to that of the ﬂuid u0, after a transient phase the particle velocity will match the ﬂuid velocity, v = u, meaning that if we accept this argument, a neutrally buoyant particle should be an ideal tracer. Although from the foregoing it would seem that neutrally buoyant particles rep- resent a trivial limit to Eq. (2), in the argument presented above we did not take the correct approach to the problem, because we did not recognise that Du/Dt (cid:6)= du/dt. If we substitute Eqs. (3) and (4) for the derivatives into Eq. (18), we obtain (v − u) = − ((v − u) · ∇) u − St −1 (v − u) . (21) d dt We may then write the velocity difference between ﬂuid particle and ﬂuid as q = v − u, whence (cid:11) = − dq dt −J + St −1I (cid:12) · q, where J is the Jacobian matrix: (cid:13) ∂xux ∂xuy (cid:16) . ∂yux ∂yuy J = (22) (23) If we diagonalise matrix J we obtain the equation for the particle-ﬂuid velocity difference in coordinates aligned with the eigenvectors, which we denote by qD: (cid:13) dqD dt = λ − St−1 0 0 −λ − St−1 (cid:16) · qD. (24) Therefore, if Re(λ) > St−1, qD may grow exponentially. Now λ satisﬁes det(J − λI) = 0, so λ2 − trJ + detJ = 0. Since the ﬂow is incompressible, ∂xux + ∂yuy = trJ = 0, thence −λ2 = detJ. Given squared vorticity ω2 = (∂xuy − ∂yux)2, and squared strain s2 = s2 2, where the normal component is s1 = ∂xux − ∂yuy and 1 the shear component is s2 = ∂yux + ∂xuy, we may write + s2 Dynamics of Finite-Size Particles in Chaotic Fluid Flows λ2 = −detJ = (s2 − ω2)/4 = Q. 67 (25) Here Q = (s2−ω2)/4 is the so-called Okubo–Weiss parameter [43, 44]. If Q > 0, λ2 > 0, and λ is real, deformation dominates, as around hyperbolic points. If Q < 0, λ2 < 0, and λ is complex, rotation dominates, as near elliptic points. Equation (22) together with dr/dt = q + u deﬁnes a dissipative dynamical system dξ /dt = F(ξ ) (26) with ξ = (r,q). Equation (26) has constant divergence ∇ · F = −2/St in the four dimensional phase space of ξ . While small values of St allow for large values of the divergence, large values of St force the divergence to be small. The Stokes number is the dimensionless decay time of the particle (see Sect. 2.1): with larger St, the particle has more independence from the ﬂuid ﬂow. From Eq. (24), in areas of the ﬂow near hyperbolic stagnation points with Q > St−2, particle and ﬂow trajectories separate exponentially. To illustrate the effects of St and Q on the dynamics of a neutrally buoyant parti- cle, let us consider the simple incompressible two-dimensional model (10). In Fig. 9 (top left) the contours of Q are depicted. Notice that the high values of Q are around the hyperbolic points, while negative Q coincides with the centres of vortices – elliptic points – in the ﬂow. Figure 9 (top right) shows the trajectory of a neutrally buoyant particle starting from a point on a ﬂuid trajectory within the central vortex, but with a small velocity mismatch with the ﬂow. This mismatch is ampliﬁed in the vicinity of the hyperbolic stagnation points where Q is larger than St−2 to the extent that the particle leaves the central vortex for one of its neighbours. In the end a particle settles on a trajectory that does not visit regions of high Q, as expected for a ﬂuid parcel. While this effect is already seen in Fig. 9 (top right), it is more dramatically pictured in the trajectory shown in Fig. 9 (bottom left), in which the particle performs a long and complicated excursion wandering between different vortices before it settles in a region of low Q. To illustrate the divergence of particle and ﬂuid trajectories, and the fact that particle and ﬂuid ﬁnally arrive at an agree- ment, in Fig. 9 (bottom right) we display the difference between the particle velocity and the ﬂuid velocity at the site of the particle against time for this case. Notice that this difference seems negligible at time zero, and that it also convergences to zero at long times, but during the interval in which the excursion takes place it ﬂuctuates wildly. Even more interesting is the case of time-dependent ﬂows: B (cid:6)= 0 in our model. As in a typical Hamiltonian system, associated with the original hyperbolic stag- nation points, there are regions dominated by chaotic trajectories. Trajectories of this kind, stroboscopically sampled at the frequency of the ﬂow, are reproduced in Fig. 10. Such trajectories visit a large region of the space, which includes the original hyperbolic stagnation points and their vicinities where Q is large. Excluded from the reach of such a chaotic trajectory remain areas where the dynamics is regular: KAM tori. In our model these lie in the regions where Q < St−2. A neutrally buoyant particle trying to follow a chaotic ﬂow pathline would eventually reach the highly 68 J.H.E. Cartwright et al. Fig. 9 (Top left) Contour plot illustrating magnitude of Q – lighter is higher Q – for the time- independent model Eq. (10) (the ﬂow is on a torus). (Top right) The separation of a neutrally buoyant particle trajectory (thin line) from the ﬂow (thick line) in regions of high Q allows the particle to wander between cells. (Bottom left) After a complicated excursion, a particle (thin line) eventually settles in a zone of low Q of the ﬂow; a KAM torus (thick line). (Bottom right) The velocity difference vx − ux between the particle and the ﬂow against time hyperbolic regions of the ﬂow. This makes likely its separation and departure from such a pathline, in search of another pathline to which to converge. However, conver- gence will only be achieved if the pathline never crosses areas of high Q. Figure 10 demonstrates this phenomenon: a particle was released in the chaotic zone with a small velocity mismatch. The particle followed the ﬂow, until, coming upon a region of sufﬁciently high Q, it was thrown out of that ﬂow pathline onto a long excursion that ﬁnally ended up in a regular region of the ﬂow on a KAM torus. The regular regions of the ﬂow then constitute attractors of the dissipative dynamical system Eq. (26) that describes the behaviour of a neutrally buoyant particle. The chaotic trajectories in a Hamiltonian system are characterised by positive Lyapunov expo- nents. The Lyapunov exponents are an average along the trajectory of the local rate Dynamics of Finite-Size Particles in Chaotic Fluid Flows 69 Fig. 10 Poincaré sections of trajectories in the time-dependent ﬂow of Eq. (10). From top left to bottom right are shown (dots) four increasingly chaotic examples of the ﬂow, and (crosses), the trajectories of neutrally buoyant particles in the ﬂows that in each case ﬁnally end up on a KAM torus within the regular region of the ﬂow of convergence or divergence. Hence, for a trajectory to be chaotic, it is a necessary condition that it visit regions of positive Q: an upper bound to Q is an upper bound to the Lyapunov exponent. Consider the implications of these results for two-dimensional turbulent ﬂows, in which Q deﬁnes three regions: in the vortex centres it is strongly negative; in the circulation cells that surround them, strongly positive, while in the background between vortices it ﬂuctuates close to zero (see, e.g., [45–49]). As a result of the dynamics, an initially uniform distribution of neutrally buoyant particles with ﬁnite size evolves in time towards an asymptotic distribution concentrated in the inner part of vortices where Q < 0, and with voids in the areas crossed by ﬂuid trajectories that visit regions where Q > St−2, as we illustrate in Fig. 11. 70 J.H.E. Cartwright et al. Fig. 11 Small neutrally buoyant tracer particles converge to the centres of vortices in a two- dimensional turbulent ﬂow simulation; distribution at times (top left to bottom right) t = 1, 2, 3, 4, and 6 of particles uniformly distributed in the ﬂow at time t = 1 [41] Thus even with a small rigid neutrally buoyant spherical tracer particle in an incompressible two-dimensional ﬂuid ﬂow the tracer trajectories can separate from the ﬂuid trajectories in those regions where the ﬂow has hyperbolic stagna- tion points. For ﬂows with chaotic pathlines, analysis shows that the tracer will only evolve on trajectories having Lyapunov exponents bounded by the value Dynamics of Finite-Size Particles in Chaotic Fluid Flows 71 of the Stokes drag coefﬁcient. Therefore, by making the value of this coefﬁ- cient small enough, one can force the tracer to settle on either the regular KAM- tori dominated regions or to selectively visit the chaotic regions with small Lya- punov exponents. As well as its interest from the viewpoint of dynamical sys- tems, this result is important to the analysis of observations and experiments with neutrally buoyant particles both in the laboratory and in the atmosphere and oceans. The heuristic criterion for the departure of trajectories of neutrally buoyant par- ticles trajectories from those of the ﬂuid elements has been complemented by more rigorous analysis. For example, the stability of the ﬂuid ﬂow manifold which is invariant under the neutrally buoyant particle dynamics was studied in the more general context of the perturbed invariant manifold of the non-neutral particles [50, 51]. For neutrally buoyant particles, this analysis parallels a previous inter- pretation of the ﬂuid invariant manifold as a “bailout embedding” and the depar- ture of trajectories as a “blowout bifurcation” taking place as the Stokes num- ber is varied [52]. In both cases, it has been found that the heuristic criterion based on the Okubo-Weiss parameter underestimates the areas of departure. Finally noise or ﬂuctuating forces enhance the phenomenon, as has been rigorously proved in [53]. 4.2 3D Flows and Bailout Embeddings For incompressible two-dimensional ﬂows, since the Jacobian matrix is traceless, the two eigenvalues must add up to zero, which implies that they are either both purely imaginary or both purely real, equal in absolute value and opposite in sign. The result is that the particles can abandon the ﬂuid trajectories in the neighbour- hood of the saddle points and other unstable orbits, where the Jacobian eigenvalues are real, and eventually overcome the Stokes drag, to ﬁnally end up in a regular region of the ﬂow on a KAM torus dominated by the imaginary eigenvalues. From a more physical point of view, this effect implies that the particles tend to stay away from the regions of strongest strain. In contrast to the two-dimensional case, in time-dependent 3D ﬂows the incom- pressibility condition only implies that the sum of the three independent eigenvalues must be zero. This less restrictive condition allows for many more combinations. Triplets of real eigenvalues, two positive and one negative or vice versa, as well as one real eigenvalue of either sign together with a complex-conjugate pair whose real part is of the opposite sign, are possible. Accordingly, chaotic trajectories may have one or two positive Lyapunov numbers, and a richer range of dynamical situations may be expected. Note that the dynamical system governing the behaviour of neutrally buoyant particles is composed of a lower-dimensional dynamics within a “larger”, higher- dimensional dynamics. Equation (18) can be seen as an equation for the variable q = (v − u) which in turn deﬁnes the equation of motion (˙r = u) of a ﬂuid 72 J.H.E. Cartwright et al. element whenever the solution of the former is zero. In this sense we may say that the ﬂuid parcel dynamics is embedded in the particle dynamics. In reference to the fact that some of the embedding trajectories abandon some of those of the embedded dynamics, the generalisation of this process is dubbed a bailout embedding [52]. Consider neutrally buoyant particles immersed in a ﬂow in which each compo- nent of the velocity vector ﬁeld is sinusoidally modulated with a relative phase shift of 2π/3 and where x, y, and z are to be considered (mod2π ) dx dt dy dt dz dt = (1 + sin 2π t) · (A sin z + C cos y), (cid:13) (cid:16)(cid:16) (cid:13) = 1 + sin 2π (cid:13) (cid:13) = 1 + sin 2π t + 1 3 t + 2 3 · (B sin x + A cos z), (cid:16)(cid:16) · (C sin y + B cos x). (27) This is a modiﬁed version of the ABC ﬂow [54]. This ﬂow shows structures con- sisting of a complex array of KAM sheets and tubes surrounded by chaotic volumes [55]. Neutrally buoyant particles show a tendency to accumulate inside KAM tubes as depicted in Fig. 12, where ten particles, initially distributed at random in the cubic cell, are shown to end up in the interior of two of the tubes. Fig. 12 Stroboscopic sampling (with period T=1) of the position of 10 particles initially distributed at random in a ﬂow described by Eq. (27) with A = 2, B = 0.4, C = 1.2. The dots represent the positions of these particles at the strobing periods 1,000–2,000 Dynamics of Finite-Size Particles in Chaotic Fluid Flows 73 5 Advection of Finite-Size Particles in Open Flows Here we concentrate on the question of how the global dynamics of advection changes in two-dimensional open ﬂows due to inertia. As discussed in Sect. 2, one big difference between ﬁnite-size and non-inertial particles is that the dynamics of the former is dissipative, which opens the possibility of the existence of attractors. In the ﬂow model of the von Kármán vortex street of Sect. 3.3, it has been found that attractors are possible in the bubble regime 2/3 < R < 2. Light particles might thus become trapped in the wake forever. For R = 1.33, St−1 = 30 there are, for instance, three coexisting attractors [56–58]: two ﬁxed points around the cylinder’s surface and one at x = ∞. To gain insight into what happens to ensembles of bubbles, the residence time in a region around the cylinder is determined. The initial velocities were set to be equal to the ﬂow velocity. Figure 13 shows the result, where grey, white and black depict increasingly long residence times. Dark regions mark permanently trapped particles. This region corresponds thus to the basin of attraction of the two ﬁnite attractors, which is in fact a projection of the basin structure in the full phase space on the plane of the ﬂow. At other inertia parameters there also exist chaotic saddles which ensure that the approach toward the attractors, including the escape from the wake (the approach toward the attractor at x = ∞) is a transient chaotic process. A systematic investigation of the escape rate κ(St) from the hyperbolic parts of this saddle shows (Fig. 14) that the escape rate is below the escape rate of ﬂuid parcels or passive tracers in the full range St−1 > 12. This indicates that bubbles spend much more time in the wake than ﬂuid particles. In the interval 14 < St−1 < 45 the escape rate vanishes indicating the presence of attractors. For St−1 in between 33 and 45 these attractors are chaotic. Beyond 45 the escape rate is positive, and it approaches for large St−1 the value of ideal tracers. Fig. 13 Finite-size particles in the von Kármán ﬂow. Residence time for bubbles of parameter St−1 = 30, R = 1.33 (g = 0) at t = 0.3 mod 1. Basins of attraction of two chaotic attractors appear shaded dark in the plane of the ﬂuid. From [57] 74 J.H.E. Cartwright et al. Fig. 14 Escape rate as a function of the Stokes number in the bubble regime (R = 1.7). The horizontal line is the escape rate for passive tracers. From [57] Fig. 15 Escape rate as a function of the Stokes number in the aerosol regime (R = 0.5). The horizontal line is the escape rate for passive tracers. From [57] The tendency is opposite for aerosol particles. The escape rate is above the escape rate of ﬂuid particles for any value of St, i.e. heavy particles spend much less time in the wake than ﬂuid particles (Fig. 15). There is a qualitative argument explaining why bubbles tend to form attractors. The particles are typically subject to local vortices. The centrifugal force for a par- ticle comoving with a vortex is proportional to the density difference ρp − ρf . For heavy particles this force pushes particles outward, but for light ones it attracts par- ticles toward the vortex centre. The presence of this centripetal force is an important reason for the existence of bubble attractors. The mechanism is similar to an obser- vation of Maxey [12] according to which aerosols (bubbles) settle in the presence of gravity faster (slower) in turbulent ﬂows than in a ﬂuid at rest. The explanation of this phenomenon is the centrifugal (centripetal) effect of the turbulent vortices. As a consequence of the dependence of the dynamics on particle parameters, when starting from a mixture of particles of the same density but of different size, segregation can be observed in chaotic ﬂows consisting of a sequence of obstacles. As an example of this type of ﬂow, we consider an inﬁnite chain of cylinders situated Dynamics of Finite-Size Particles in Chaotic Fluid Flows 75 Fig. 16 Separation of bubbles in a chain of cylinders. The distribution of particles with R = 1.4 and St−1 = 20 St−1 = 120 coloured red and blue, respectively, after 10 time units. The initial location is a small square with uniformly mixed particles in front of the cylinder located at the origin. From [57] at a distance of 8 cylinder radii from each other. The initial droplet of particles contains a uniform mixture of particles of St−1 = 20 (red) and St−1 = 120 (blue), and is injected into the ﬂow in front of the cylinder centred at the origin. After passing several cylinders, the droplet exhibits a clear separation as shown in Fig. 16. The larger light particles (St−1 = 20) escape more slowly due to the centripetal effect of the vortices. The ﬂow in the cylinder chain acts therefore as a chaotic chromatograph [57]. A work worthy of note is that of Haller and coworkers [50, 59]. They show that for small particle sizes, i.e., for small Stokes numbers (St (cid:21) 1), the dynamics of a ﬁnite-size particle can be approximated by the dynamics on a low-dimensional inertial manifold, which can be calculated explicitly from a given velocity ﬁeld. Following an approach of Maxey [12], they show that after a short transient time the equation of motion of such small inertial particles can well be approximated by the equation, termed inertial equation in [50] ˙r(t) = u(r(t),t) + Wn + St (cid:16) R − 1 (cid:13) 3 2 D Dt u(r(t),t). (28) This can formally be obtained by expanding Eq.(5) around its St = 0 solution: ˙r(t) = u + Wn up to ﬁrst order in St. The advantage of this equation becomes clear when tracing particles backwards in time. Finding a localised source of particle release is often of central relevance. Such a source-inversion problem appears, for example, in locating a source of air- transported contaminant particles. The approach based on the time-reversed integra- tion of Eq. (5) leads to an unavoidable numerical instability due to an exponential growth of the type exp (t/St). In contrast, the inertial equation (28) is free from this instability. It can be solved easily in reverse time, too, and this procedure provides with good accuracy the initial spatial coordinates of inertial particles. This has been clearly demonstrated in the example of bubbles in the von Kármán ﬂow [50], and 76 J.H.E. Cartwright et al. in other realistic cases like e.g., anthrax in the wind ﬁeld of an urban street canyon [60] and aerosols in the ﬂow of a hurricane [61]. In spite of the repelling centrifugal force for heavy particles, Vilela and Motter showed [62] that aerosols can also be trapped by open ﬂows under certain circum- stances. Such aerosol attractors can exist due to a special interplay of two or more vortices. In the case of neutrally buoyant particles, R = 2/3, in an open chaotic ﬂow, the effect of inertia is to cause a dispersion of particles around the fractal structure of the unstable chaotic set which exists for perfect tracers [63]. Since the introduction of inertia enlarges the phase space to a 4-dimensional manifold (for 2D ﬂows), it is no surprise that the properties of the motion on the 2-dimensional projection to the con- ﬁguration space are different from its non-inertial counterpart. The important point is that, for small Stokes numbers, the distribution of long-lived inertial particles can still be understood in terms of the simple chaotic set of the non-inertial dynamics. In [63], an expression is derived for the dispersion of particles around the inertia-less chaotic set, which agrees well with numerical simulations. The main result of this work is that inertia causes the fractal structure of the chaotic set to be lost in the conﬁguration space, so that below a certain scale determined by the Stokes number, the spatial distribution becomes smooth. In the slow manifold approach of Haller and coworkers, the slow dynamics coincides with that of inﬁnitesimally small ideal tracers; for W = 0, they ﬁnd that ˙r(t) = u, as can also be seen from (28). There- fore the particle dynamics should synchronise with Lagrangian tracer motion. It has been shown [51], however, that the slow manifold has domains that repel nearby trajectories, which explains the numerical ﬁndings of [63]. 6 Coagulation and Fragmentation of Finite-Size Particles So far we have only discussed the motion of passive ﬁnite-size particles which are carried by the ﬂow but do not interact with each other. But there is an increasing interest in the investigation of the dynamics of active ﬁnite-size particles. The active processes taken into account can be of different natures depending on the context. In ecology these active ﬁnite-size particles, usually aerosols heavier than the ﬂuid, can be plankton species in a limnic or marine environment where plankton populations change their number due to growth and death. Additionally competi- tion and predator-prey interactions inﬂuence their dynamics. Particles of different sizes gather along different attractors, as explained in the previous Sections, and therefore different species are expected to occupy different niches, which promotes the coexistence of competitors. In chemical reactions the active ﬁnite-size particles are often bubbles (lighter than the ﬂuid) containing catalysts which mediate particular chemical reactions. The example which is discussed here in more detail concerns the process of coag- ulation and fragmentation of ﬁnite-size particles in the presence of gravity, which plays an important role in cloud physics [64], marine snow and sediment dynamics Dynamics of Finite-Size Particles in Chaotic Fluid Flows 77 [65, 66], engineering [67], planet formation [68] as well as wastewater treatment [69]. In all the cases mentioned above particles are assumed to interact very rarely, i.e., a kind of “dilute gas” assumption is used. Coagulation and fragmentation are two processes which inﬂuence the size of the particles. Coagulation can happen when two particles collide and form a larger coagulate due to some adhesive forces [64]. Fragmentation is the break-up of a large aggregate into a few smaller ones due to shear forces in the ﬂuid. The dynamics of a system including coagulation and fragmentation is more complicated than the pure advection of ﬁnite-size particles. The difﬁculty lies in the different sizes of the coagulates being advected by the ﬂuid. Because of the dilute approximation, we can assume that the motion of all particles follows the Maxey-Riley equation (5). Coag- ulates of different sizes correspond to different parameters, namely different Stokes number St and settling velocity W in these equations. Instead of one dynamical system one has to deal with a set of dynamical systems, each of them corresponding to a certain coagulate size. Moreover, the number of coagulates in each dynamical system is changing continuously due to coagulation and fragmentation. Coagulates of different size converge to different attractors [70] which can be either ﬁxed points, periodic motions, quasiperiodic motions on tori or chaotic attrac- tors (cf. Fig. 17). Among the latter we ﬁnd a variety of different forms from very localised ones up to space ﬁlling attractors where coagulates are distributed over the whole conﬁguration space. As a consequence coagulates of different size are located in different parts of the conﬁguration space in the long-term limit. Hence, a system containing coagulates of different sizes is characterised by an overlay of different attractors possessing possibly different dynamical properties. However, since coagulation and fragmentation happen usually on much smaller time scales than convergence to the attractor, the overall dynamics is in general transient and only a blurred structure of the attractors will be observable. The same arguments apply to systems where the ﬁnite-size particles are bubbles instead of aerosols. Bubbles and aerosols of the same size will occupy different regions in conﬁguration space and exhibit a different kind of dynamics. Therefore, the dynamics of bubbles and aerosols as well as their changes (bifurcations) with Fig. 17 Attractors for 3 different size classes in a convection ﬂow (9) (cf. Sect. 3.2 for the ﬂow parameters). (a) St−1 = 7.0, (b) St−1 = 2.778, (c) St−1 = 2.253 and W = 0.4/A in all cases 78 J.H.E. Cartwright et al. respect to variations of their size are completely different even in the case where their sizes are identical [70]. Finally it is important to note that the form of the attractors depends crucially on the ﬂow [71, 62, 72]. Let us assume that there is a smallest particle in the system which cannot be fragmented. We call it primary particle with radius a1, mass m1, Stokes number St1 and settling velocity W1. To distinguish the different sizes of the coagulates it is convenient to introduce a size class index α corresponding to the number of primary particles that make up the coagulate. The radius of the coagulate is then aα = α1/3a1, its Stokes number can be expressed as Stα = α2/3St1, and its settling velocity is Wα = α2/3W1; here we see that W/St is independent of α, as discussed at the end of Sect. 2.1. To derive these relations we assume that the coagulates are spherical particles with radius aα. This assumption applies well to raindrops, while it is a crude approximation for marine aggregates. Marine aggregates are compos- ites of an inorganic kernel like silt or clay with organisms like algae and bacteria attached to it which make up a fractal structure for the whole aggregate. Hence the shape of marine aggregates is more a fractal object than a spherical one. Coagulation results from a collision of two particles of radii ai and aj forming a coagulate of radius a3 j owing to mass conservation. This implies that the size class index of the new coagulate follows from αnew = αi + αj which enters Stnew and Wnew. The velocity of the newly formed coagulate is determined by momentum conservation. = a3 i + a3 new The mechanisms of fragmentation are more complex. While raindrops break apart when they reach a certain maximum size, marine aggregates split up owing to shear forces in the ﬂuid. In the latter case there exists a critical shear force which has to be larger than the intrinsic binding forces of the coagulate to lead to fragmen- tation. The strength of these binding forces can be measured in terms of a parameter called coagulate strength. For large enough shear forces which overcome the critical shear force a coagulate splits into two smaller ones (determined by a splitting rule, see below). Their velocities are equal owing to momentum conservation and their location is assumed to be directly neighbouring to each other in a random orienta- tion. If the binding force of one of the new smaller coagulates is again smaller than the critical shear force, then an additional break-up takes place. This way more than two new coagulates can result from a single fragmentation event. Implementing coagulation and fragmentation in the way described above the dynamics of the system can be simulated for different ﬂuid ﬂows. For all subsequent ﬁgures concerning coagulation and fragmentation the convection ﬂow explained in Sect. 3.2 is used. Similar results can be obtained for the sine shear ﬂow [72]. In any case one obtains a steady size distribution of coagulates where coagulation and frag- mentation balance each other. The shape of the asymptotic size distribution depends on several factors. Firstly, the size distribution depends on the ﬂuid ﬂow. Secondly, the shape of the size distribution is crucially dependent on the mechanism of fragmentation. While the realization of coagulation is rather straightforward and does not inﬂuence the shape of the size distribution, fragmentation needs a more detailed knowledge about the break-up processes to be taken into account. Two different properties of the Dynamics of Finite-Size Particles in Chaotic Fluid Flows 79 fragmentation process are important to consider: (i) what is the critical shear force (splitting condition), how it depends on the size of the coagulate and on the intrinsic binding strength or coagulate strength and, (ii) what is the size distribution of the two fragments created (splitting rule). (cid:18) To quantify differences in the size distributions depending on various parameters characterising either the ﬂow or the active processes it is convenient to deﬁne the average size class index (cid:23)α(t)(cid:24) = α αNα(t)/N(t), where Nα(t) denotes the number of coagulates in size class α, while N(t) is the total number of coagulates in the system. Note that the total number of coagulates always changes in time owing to coagulation and fragmentation. As time evolves (cid:23)α(t)(cid:24) is found to always reach a limiting value α∞ though still ﬂuctuating. This implies that a steady size distribution sets in, which is unique, i. e., one ﬁnds the same distribution for almost all initial conditions. Let us now discuss the dependence of the size distribution on the details of the fragmentation process. Unfortunately there are only a few experimental studies devoted to the fragmentation process [73, 74]. Due to this limited knowledge about the details of fragmentation an inverse modelling process has to be considered of making several assumptions about fragmentation and asking which of those yield size distributions which are qualitatively in agreement with observations. In this way one is able to ﬁnd indications for the most probable fragmentation mechanism. Fragmentation is modelled by two different mechanisms which occur simulta- neously: On the one hand shear forces in the ﬂuid lead to shear fragmentation as is typical for marine aggregates and, on the other hand, size limiting fragmentation splits all coagulates of a predeﬁned maximum size as is typical for rain drops. The latter break-up process is assumed to be present in shear fragmentation as well. It is known that larger coagulates are more fragile and, hence, fragment more easily. In shear fragmentation the following ansatz for the critical velocity difference Δuc across a coagulate of size aα is made: Δuc aα ∼ γ α−1/3 (29) where γ is the coagulate strength: a change of this parameter corresponds to consid- ering different types of coagulates. This ansatz is also supported by Taylor [75] and Delichatsios [76] who derived an expression for the critical velocity gradient for the break-up of spherical liquid drops depending on surface tension and viscosity of the drop. Using Eq. (29) the average size class index is essentially determined by the coagulate strength γ measuring the intrinsic binding strength of the coagulate. With increasing γ the limiting average size class index α∞ has been found to grow in simulations [72, 77] as α∞ ∼ γ 1/3 (30) 80 J.H.E. Cartwright et al. Fig. 18 Asymptotic average size class index α∞ vs. coagulate strength γ for = 55.0, W1 = 3.2St1, St αmax = 30, amax = 5 × 10−5 −1 1 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 ∞ α 40 45 50 55 γ 60 65 70 Fig. 19 Normalised size distributions for different coagulate strengths vs. −1 = 7.0, aα/α∞ for St 1 W1 = 0.4St1. We started with an initial condition of 106 particles with radius a1 = 1.5 × 10−5 ) α N ( x a m / α N 100 10–1 10–2 10–3 γ = 42.5 γ = 45 γ =50 0.6 0.9 1.2 1.5 1.8 2.1 a/<a> until it reaches (at larger values of γ ) a constant ﬁnite value (Fig. 18). In the latter interval of γ fragmentation is exclusively dominated by size limiting fragmentation since the binding forces are too strong to allow for shear fragmentation. In a certain intermediate range of γ where shear fragmentation dominates, all size distributions collapse onto a master curve as shown in Fig. 19 if the steady state size distribution is represented in a normalised form according to Nα/ max (Nα) vs. aα/α∞. As already mentioned the splitting rule determining the size of the two frag- ments after breaking apart is another important detail of the fragmentation process which can possess several forms. Three different splitting rules have been taken into account in numerical experiments to investigate their impact on the steady size distribution of coagulates: Uniform splitting describes a break-up where the size of the ﬁrst fragment is chosen randomly from a uniform distribution between the smallest size class index 1 and the size class index of the coagulate before splitting αold. For large scale splitting the two fragments are of almost equal size, which is expressed mathematically by α1 = αold/2 − |ξ | where ξ is a random number (rounded towards the nearest integer) from a normal distribution with zero mean and standard deviation 1, that is cut off at ±(αold − 1). Erosion corresponds to a break-up where the size of the ﬁrst fragment is much smaller than the other one, so that α1 = |ξ | with ξ deﬁned as for large scale splitting. Numerical simulations show that the shape of the steady size distribution depends crucially on the applied splitting rule. While for erosion and uniform splitting the smallest size class contains most of the coagulates, large scale splitting yields a size distribution with a pronounced maximum at rather small size classes and an expo- nential decay towards larger size classes (Fig. 20). Particularly this exponential tail Dynamics of Finite-Size Particles in Chaotic Fluid Flows 81 N / α N 10–1 10–2 10–3 10–4 (a) (b) (c) 0.5 1 1.5 2 104a 0.5 1 1.5 2 104a 0.5 1 1.5 2 104a Fig. 20 Size distributions for different splitting rules (a) uniform splitting, (b) large scale splitting, (c) erosion. The parameters are the same as in Fig. 19, γ = 80 corresponds rather well to observations of size distributions of marine aggregates in tidal areas [78]. This can be interpreted as a strong hint that large scale splitting might be the dominant fragmentation rule for marine aggregates in coastal waters. The shape of the size distribution is also dependent on the velocity ﬁeld of the ﬂow. As long as the attractors for all occurring size classes are space-ﬁlling, there are no large qualitative differences between the limiting size distributions. Quantita- tively, the differences are due to the shear induced by the ﬂow ﬁeld. However, if the attractors appearing for different ﬂows are not all space ﬁlling but differ essentially with respect to their extension in the conﬁguration space (localised vs. space ﬁlling) or dynamically (periodic and quasiperiodic vs. chaotic) then large differences in the steady state size distributions may be found. 7 Future Directions The ubiquity and relevance of suspended particles in time-dependent ﬂows makes it very important to understand properly the dynamics of ﬁnite-size particle advection in chaotic ﬂows. This area is in active development, and the subject is the source of many tantalising questions to scientists. We list below what we think are some promising directions of this ﬁeld. Active inertial ﬂows. The existing theory of active ﬂows (that is, the dynamics of chemical reactions or other active processes taking place in a ﬂow) is cur- rently formulated mainly for passive tracers [79]. However, this theory only assumes the existence of fractal spatial distribution of the particles in the ﬂow, and exponential contraction towards these fractal ﬁlaments. Generally, in case of inertial particles, as discussed extensively in this paper, the fractal structures are present in a phase space which is higher dimensional than the conﬁguration space. If the projection of the phase space to the conﬁguration space shows a fractal distribution of particles, we can expect that the theory developed for passive tracers holds for inertial particles as well. A major difference, however, is that particles of different size or inertia are expected 82 J.H.E. Cartwright et al. to occupy slightly different fractal sets. For example, in the case of species coexistence, a recent work shows that inertia can have a dramatic effect on the population dynamics [80], indicating that it is very important in gen- eral active processes. The coagulation and fragmentation process of Sect. 6 is another example of an active process for which the particles’ inertia is essential. Non-spherical particles. Up to now most of the work has been devoted to particles of spherical shape; Eq. (2) is only valid for spherical particles. This approxi- mation works well in case of the formation of raindrops, but is only a rather crude approximation in many other applications like e.g. marine aggregates, which have a fractal-like structure. It can be expected that the non-spherical shape of the particles has a large inﬂuence on the dynamics of the parti- cles [81]. As an example the aggregation theory of dust particles in planet formation has been discussed by Wilkinson et al. [68]. While fractal-like particles have been investigated in the context of a mean ﬁeld approach to describe aggregation and fragmentation [82, 83], the consideration of such non-spherical particles in chaotic ﬂows is a topic of current research. Hydrodynamical interactions between particles. By moving in the ﬂow, particles modify the velocity ﬁeld in their vicinity, and this change may in its turn affect the motion of another nearby particle. In this way, a hydrodynamical interaction between particles is created which amounts to an inter-particle force. This effect is usually neglected, but may become very important in high particle concentrations. A particularly important question in this con- text is how the fractal particle distributions created by chaotic advection are affected by the inter-particle interactions [84]. Non-rigid particles. The Maxey-Riley equation assumes a rigid particle, but there are many important cases where the “particle” is non-rigid. An example is raindrops, or any other liquid droplets within a ﬂuid ﬂow [85]. The fact that their shape is variable and depends in particular on the strain makes their treatment challenging, but important. Neglected terms in the Maxey-Riley equations. In numerical or analytical investi- gations of ﬁnite-size particles in chaotic ﬂows, the history term and the Faxén terms of the Maxey-Riley equation are almost universally neglected by researchers. It is important to have a more rigorous treatment of these terms [86], and to know more precisely under what conditions one can neglect them, and if there are particular ﬂows for which these terms can be important. We ﬁnish with a brief discussion on the case of particles advected by turbulent ﬂows. We have focused throughout this work on the case of non-turbulent (though chaotic) ﬂows. There is a vast literature on effects of inertia in fully developed turbulence, an important subject for many areas. Today it is possible to investi- gate the particle properties in turbulence at high spatial and temporal resolution. By the appearance of advanced experimental techniques [87, 88] a direct compar- ison of experiments and numerical simulations is available. The smallest scales in turbulence are given by the Kolmogorov length η = (ν3/(cid:14))1/4 and the Kolmogorov Dynamics of Finite-Size Particles in Chaotic Fluid Flows 83 time τη = (ν/(cid:14))1/2, where (cid:14) denotes the energy dissipation rate [88]. It is natural to deﬁne a Stokes number Stη as the ratio of the Stokesian relaxation time τ = 2a2/(9Rν) following from Eq. (2) for particles of size a to τη: Stη = τ/τη. Note that this Stokes number differs from the one used throughout the paper which is St = τ U/L (as can be seen from (6)), i.e., the ratio of τ to the large scale hydrodynamical time. The particle dynamics in turbulence depends on the scale of observation. On small scales, below the Kolmogorov lengths (in the so-called dissipative range), the ﬂow is smooth, and viscosity dominates. The overall situation is similar to what has been discussed in the bulk of the paper: particles tend to accumulate on chaotic attractors (projected to the space of the ﬂow), and show fractal patterns. The characteristic dimension (e.g., the Kaplan-Yorke dimension [17]) starts to deviate (quadratically) from the dimension n of the ﬂow as Stη takes on small but positive values [89]. The dimension then reaches a minimum value at a Stokes number Stη1 of order one, corresponding to a strongest clustering, also called preferential concen- tration, with a clean fractal structure. A further increase of the Stokes number leads to an increase of dimension, which reaches again the value of n at some Stη2 > Stη1, still of order one. Beyond this Stokes number, the attractor dimension is larger than n in the full phase space, and its projection on the ﬂuid is space-ﬁlling. This scenario appears to be independent of the Reynolds number of the ﬂow [90] but depends smoothly on the density ratio R [91]. An important observation is that the velocity of the particles as a function of the spatial coordinate might be multivalued. Locations where the multivaluedness starts to develop are called caustics [89, 92, 93] and their existence has serious consequences for collision rates of ﬁnite-size particles. Beyond the Kolmogorov length (in the inertial range), the particle distribution is no longer scale invariant, but it is characterised by voids spanning all scales. Heavy particles have been found to cluster where the acceleration is large, i.e., where pressure gradients dominate [89]. Light particles prefer to stay in regions of the ﬂow characterised by rotation [91]. In the inertial range, preferential concentration appears thus to coincide with regions of certain Eulerian characteristics. The research of the Lagrangian properties of particles in turbulence is rapidly growing (see the review of [88]), and interesting new insights are likely to emerge. Of particular interest is the behaviour of inertial particles in non-ideal (e.g., not fully developed) turbulence. When a large scale ﬂow is superimposed on ideal turbulence, we expect that the particle dynamics on this scale becomes again similar in nature to that on small scales, and the ideas worked out in the bulk of the paper are then directly applicable. A way is sketched to derive a Langevin equation for the slow degrees of freedom of a Hamiltonian system whose fast ones are mixing Anosov. It uses the Anosov-Kasuga adiabatic invariant, martingale theory, Ruelle’s formula for weakly non-autonomous SRB measures, and large deviation theory. 1 Introduction Model reduction is a central theme in science. In particular, it is common to pro- pose to replace “inessential” details of parts of dynamics by noise. This paper addresses the question of to what extent such reduction may be justiﬁed if one starts from a deterministic Hamiltonian systems, the agreed foundation for all classical mechanics. Suppose a Hamiltonian system consists of some slow degrees of freedom coupled to a large number of fast chaotic degrees of freedom. For example, consider the con- formation change degrees of freedom of a biomolecule coupled to its vibrations and movement of water molecules. It is standard to model the slow degrees of freedom by a Langevin equation, that is a stochastic differential equation where the effects of the fast degrees of freedom have been replaced by an effective Hamiltonian system, damping and noise. Despite being in use now for 100 years [16], it seems to me there is not yet a satisfactory derivation of a Langevin equation for the slow degrees of freedom. See the reviews [11, 14] for the state of affairs. An example system which has recently resurfaced is the “piston problem” [18]. One precursor is [8] for the case of Hamiltonians which are quadratic in the fast degrees of freedom and subject to a continuum approximation for the distribution of frequencies of their normal modes. This approach was presented nicely by [31], and treated more throughly in [28], but the crucial assumption (for the analysis) of harmonic fast degrees of freedom seems unrealistic and overly restrictive to me. A second precursor is the line of investigation of the sequence of papers [25, 30, 3, 13], which depends on assuming ergodicity of the fast dynamics restricted to an energy level for frozen slow degrees of freedom, but I don’t think these papers can be considered to make a mathematically complete derivation of a Langevin equation. As a side-remark, ergodicity may be considered unrealistic and overly restrictive, but perhaps true ergodicity is not really required. This paper seeks to put more mathematical ﬂesh on the ideas of the second approach, under the stronger assumption that the fast dynamics is mixing Anosov on relevant energy levels for frozen slow degrees of freedom. Although this is a yet more restrictive assumption than ergodicity, [9] advocated that it may be reasonable to assume that the dynamics of a large Hamiltonian system act as if mixing Anosov on relevant energy levels (the “chaotic hypothesis”) and that results derived under this assumption may apply more widely. It is worth noting that a two-degree of freedom physically relevant mixing Anosov system has been constructed [12] and I believe analogues can be made in higher degrees of freedom. Under the mixing Anosov assumption, some nice mathematical results can be applied, namely a formula of Ruelle for the ﬁrst-order effect of weak non-autonomy on the natural measure for a chaotic system [27], and an almost sure invariance prin- ciple to approximate the integral of a zero-mean vector of observables for a chaotic system by a multidimensional Brownian walk [23]. With some work I believe that these ingredients can be put together to derive a Langevin equation for the slow degrees of freedom. The paper sketches the main lines of the proposal. 2 Assumptions 1. Suppose (M,ω) is a symplectic manifold of large dimension 2m and H : M → R is a smooth function (the Hamiltonian). Together they deﬁne a Hamiltonian vec- tor ﬁeld XH on M, by ω(XH,ξ ) = dH(ξ ) for all tangent vectors ξ . Equivalently, the symplectic form ω deﬁnes a Poisson bracket {F,G} = ω(XF,XG) on smooth functions F,G:M → R, and then dF(XH) = XH(F) = {F,H} for all F:M → R. Let φt be the ﬂow of XH. 2. Suppose N is a symplectic manifold of moderate dimension 2n, representing the slow degrees of freedom. It will be enough to do local analysis in N, so without loss of generality it can be considered to be a piece of R2n with local coordinate functions Zj. Suppose π :M → N is a Poisson map, i.e. for all smooth functions F,G:N → R, {F ◦ π ,G ◦ π }M = {F,G}N ◦ π . 3. Suppose for each Z ∈ N, the “ﬁbre” π −1(Z) is a symplectic submanifold of M, i.e. the restriction of ω to its tangent space is everywhere non-degenerate. It follows that the restriction HZ of H to π −1(Z) deﬁnes a Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld XHZ on π −1(Z) (the constrained vector ﬁeld). Furthermore, XHZ preserves the 2(m − n)-dimensional volume form Langevin Equation for Slow Degrees of Freedom of Hamiltonian Systems 91 ΩZ = ω∧(m−n)/(m − n)! on π −1(Z), the level sets (H,π )−1(E,Z), and the (2m − 2n − 1)-dimensional volume form μZ,E on (H,π )−1(E,Z) deﬁned by μ ∧ dH = ΩZ. Denote its ﬂow by ψt. 4. Suppose (cid:17) WZ(E): = ΩZ {H≤E} is ﬁnite for relevant Z,E and differentiable (actually, WZ(E) ﬁnite is not really necessary as long as its derivative with respect to Z and E is deﬁnable). Its E-derivative can be written as (cid:17) W (cid:18) Z(E) = μZ,E. H−1(E) Then μZ,E induces an invariant probability measure λZ,E(A) = 1 W(cid:18) Z(E) (cid:17) μZ,E A for subsets A on the level set for XHZ , which Boltzmann called an “ergode” and Gibbs a “microcanonical ensemble”. Subscripts (Z,E) on measures μ and λ will often be dropped. For a function g:π −1(Z) → R, its mean with respect to λ will be written as λ(g). 5. Suppose Vj = {Zj ◦ π ,H} are slow compared to XHZ , in a sense to be made more precise in the next assump- tion. 6. Suppose XHZ is mixing Anosov on the level sets for relevant E,Z. In particular, suppose the autocorrelation of the deviation v(s) of V ◦ ψs from its mean decays in a short time ε (cid:21) 1 on the “slow” timescale, that for signiﬁcant change in Z under the mean of V. 7. Suppose the size of v (in units for the slow timescale) scales like √ δ/ε for some δ. 8. Suppose the temperature T > 0 is signiﬁcantly higher than a value determined by δ and the symplectic form on N, to be made explicit in Sect. 4.3. 9. Finally, suppose the heat capacity per fast degree of freedom is positive and bounded. 92 3 Aim R.S. MacKay The aim is to show that for ε small the distribution of paths π ◦ φt(Y) for random Y with respect to λZ0,E0 and for t in any order-one time interval, is close to that for the solutions of a system of stochastic ordinary differential equations dZi = (Jij − βDij)∇jF dt + σik dWk, Z(0) = Z0, (1) with ∇jF a shorthand for , J representing the Poisson bracket on N (i.e. {F,G} = ∇iFJij∇jG), β the inverse temperature for the initial energy, F:N → R the free energy function at the given temperature, ∂F ∂Zj Dij = (cid:17) 0 −∞ λZ,E(vi(0)vj(s)) ds, (2) W a multidimensional Wiener process, σ any matrix function satisfying the Einstein- Sutherland relation σ σ T = D + DT , and the Klimontovich interpretation of the stochastic differential equation. Deﬁnitions of β, F and the Klimontovich interpretation will be recalled at the appropriate points. Equation (1) with Klimontovich interpretation implies Klein-Fokker-Planck equa- tion ∂ρ ∂t = −div (ρ(J − βD)∇F − S∇ρ) (3) for the evolution of probability densities ρ with respect to volume ∧jdZj on N, where S = (D + DT )/2, the symmetric part of D. 4 Strategy The strategy of proof has six stages. First λ(V) is evaluated in terms of the micro- canonical free energy. Secondly, the ﬂuctuations v(t) of V from its mean are approx- imated by a multi-dimensional white noise with covariance D + DT . Thirdly, a correction to the ergode is derived when Z is moving, which in general yields damp- ing. Fourthly, the effect of autonomous rather than externally imposed Z-motion is argued to make no difference, to the order of approximation considered. Fifthly, the ergode is approximated by the monode (canonical ensemble) for large num- ber of degrees of freedom. Lastly, the Klimontovich interpretation is shown to be necessary. Langevin Equation for Slow Degrees of Freedom of Hamiltonian Systems 93 4.1 Zeroth Order Mean Velocity Anosov and Kasuga (e.g. [19]) proved that WZ(E) is an adiabatic invariant for XHZ ergodic on energy levels, with respect to slow external change of Z, i.e. for most trajectories the energy E(t) changes in such a way to keep WZ(t)(E(t)) ≈ w0. Deﬁne the “microcanonical free energy” f :N → R for given w0 by f (Z) = W −1 Z (w0). The following calculation shows that λ(V) = J∇f . Firstly, WZ(f (Z)) = w0, so ∇W + W(cid:18)∇f = 0, i.e. ∇f = − 1 W(cid:18) ∇W. (4) (5) (6) Thus (J∇f )j = {Zj,f } = − 1 W(cid:18) {Zj,W}. Next, the ﬂow χu of XZj◦π preserves Ω (because it is Hamiltonian) and the ﬁbration π (because π is Poisson). Thus the (cid:19) {H≤E} Ω from Z(0) to Z(u) along the ﬂow χu is the Ω-measure change of WZ(E) = of the band in π −1(Z(u)) between H−1(E) and χu((H,Z)−1(E,Z(0))). The rate of change of H along the ﬂow χu is {H,Zj ◦ π } and we can write Ω = μ ∧ dH in a ﬁbre, so (cid:17) {W,Zj} = − {H,Zj ◦ π }μ. H−1(E) (cid:19) H−1(E) {Zj ◦ π ,H}μ. Finally, λ(Vj) = 1 W(cid:18) Remark 1 A similar calculation with respect to the canonical ensemble eβFe−βHΩ on π −1(Z) (Boltzmann’s “monode”) gives mean velocity J∇F, where the canonical free energy F is deﬁned by (cid:17) −βF(Z) = e −βHΩZ. e π −1(Z) (7) Nevertheless, the canonical ensemble is not ergodic (energy is conserved), so it is not clear how to proceed further (unless we just ignore the mixing requirement for the next results). Anosov’s averaging theorem (e.g. [19]) proves that most trajectories follow the mean dynamics closely on short enough timescales. Thus from (5) the zeroth order dynamics of the slow degrees of freedom is Hamiltonian with Hamiltonian function the microcanonical free energy f . Note in particular that the zeroth order dynamics preserves f , which is a restatement of the adiabatic invariance of WZ(E). 94 R.S. MacKay I am interested in capturing effects that go beyond zeroth order, however, in par- ticular on longer timescales where the invariance of WZ(E) breaks down. Results of [5] address this, but not in a speciﬁcally Hamiltonian context. 4.2 Fluctuations The ﬂuctuations v(t) of V ◦ ψt from its mean for ﬁxed Z produce an effect approx- (cid:19) ∞ imately equivalent to white noise with covariance matrix R = −∞ C(t) dt, where Cij(t) = λ(vi(t)vj(0)), provided the integral converges. This is well known but deriva- tions vary in level of sophistication. (cid:19) The simplest version is to let z(t) = t 0 v(s) ds (I denote it by z rather than Z because this expression does not include the mean velocity of Z nor the fact that the distribution of v changes as Z moves) and prove that λ(zi(t)zj(t))/t → Rij as t → +∞ (Green-Kubo formula, actually discovered by GI Taylor [29]). Here is a proof. From the deﬁnitions of z and C, λ(zi(t)zj(t)) = (cid:19) t −t (t − |u|) Cij(u) du. So λ(zi(t)zj(t))/t = (cid:17) t −t (cid:13) 1 − (cid:16) |u| t Cij(u) du. Tackle the positive and negative ranges of u separately. Convergence of the inte- t u C(v) dv| ≤ ε for all gral for R implies that given ε > 0 there is a t0 such that | t ≥ u ≥ t0. Then for t ≥ t0, (cid:11) (cid:17) ∞ (cid:17) ∞ (cid:12) (cid:17) (cid:19) C(u) du − 0 0 t 1 − u t C(u) du = t + 1 t C(u) du + 1 t (cid:17) (cid:17) t t (cid:17) t0 0 uC(u) du C(v) dv du. 0 max (u,t0) (cid:19) The ﬁrst and third terms are each at most ε in absolute value. As a corollary this shows the covariance matrix to be non-negative. The covari- ance matrix R can be written as D+DT , with D as deﬁned in (2). Thus it also follows that the symmetric part S of D is non-negative. More sophisticated results use the theory of martingales: stochastic processes on vector spaces such that the expectation of the future value given the present one is just the present value. The best is to prove a “vector-valued almost sure invariance Langevin Equation for Slow Degrees of Freedom of Hamiltonian Systems 95 principle”, in the sense that the paths z(T) in R2n are distributed within O(T δ) of the distribution for the corresponding Brownian paths, for some δ < 1/2. This fol- lows from a general result of [23] provided the fast dynamics is sufﬁciently rapidly mixing (exponential sufﬁces). To increase the accuracy of the approximation by white noise, it could be a good idea to iteratively improve the choice of ﬁbration π to make C decay as fast as possible, in particular to remove major changes in sign. 4.3 Correction to Ergode If Z(t) is moved slowly along some path then the natural probability measure on the moving fast system lags slightly behind the instantaneous ergode λZ,E for the given value of w0. If we assume that WZ(E) is conserved exactly, the ﬁrst order difference can be computed by a formula of [27] (extrapolating a bit beyond his hypotheses, but see [7] for a statement of what should sufﬁce). Ruelle’s formula assumes a direction of time, in the sense that the probability distribution for the fast system is assumed to be absolutely continuous along unsta- ble manifolds, whereas one could have asked for it along stable manifolds. Many people regard this as justiﬁed by a hypothesis of a low entropy initial condition for the universe [17], but hypotheses on initial conditions seem to me inadequate to explain the direction of causality. I suspect a true explanation lies in quantum gravity: probably a consistent theory of quantum gravity will exhibit two phases, differing in the direction of interaction of radiation and matter. Our patch of space- time is in one of these phases and we choose to orient time accordingly.

−∞

the term Xt can be dropped since (cid:23)d(O◦ψts)Xt(cid:24) is the expectation of the rate of change of a function with respect to an invariant measure, so zero (it was included to make clear that the result is ﬁrst order in the change in the vector ﬁeld). In our case, the state space π −1(Z) also changes with time so evaluating Xs requires choosing some diffeomorphism between the state spaces at times s and t, but the result does not depend on the choice. Let us calculate the change in the mean of V due to slow motion of Z. For Xt we use XHZ (t) and for the ensemble average we use λZ(t),E. Any motion of Z can be speciﬁed as the result of a (possibly time-dependent) Hamiltonian ﬂow on N, with some Hamiltonian G, so ˙Z = J∇G. The function G lifts to G ◦ π on M and so induces a ﬁbre-preserving ﬂow χ on M, which we can use to identify points of different ﬁbres. In particular for Xs in Ruelle’s formula we can use χ ∗ tsXHZ (s), which can be written as X(H◦χst)Z(t) . Then 96 d(Vj ◦ ψts)Xs = {Vj ◦ ψts,H ◦ χst}Z(t), R.S. MacKay (9) where {,}Z is the Poisson bracket on π −1(Z), deﬁned via the restriction of the sym- plectic form to the ﬁbre. Thus Ruelle’s formula gives a time-integral of an energy- level average of a Poisson bracket on a ﬁbre. Lemma 1 For symplectic manifold K with volume form Ω, Hamiltonian H, energy level E, normalised energy level volume λE and any smooth functions F,G:K → R for which the required integrals converge, (cid:17) {F,G} dλE = 1 W(cid:18)(E) ∂ ∂E (cid:13) (cid:17) (cid:18) W (E) (cid:16) {F,H}G dλE . (10) Proof For any smooth functions F,U:K → R for which the integral converges, (cid:17) (cid:17) {F,U} dΩ = dF(XU) dΩ = 0, because it is the integral of the rate of change of F along orbits of XU with respect to an invariant measure. Apply this to a product U = GA and use Leibniz’ rule and antisymmetry for Poisson brackets to deduce that (cid:17) (cid:17) A{F,G} dΩ = {A,F}G dΩ. (11) Now take A to be (a sequence of smooth approximations to) δ(E − H): (cid:17) (cid:17) (cid:17) δ(E−H){F,G} dΩ = {δ(E−H),F}G dΩ = − δ(cid:18) (E−H){H,F}G dΩ, (12) since {.,F} is a derivation. The right hand side can be written as (cid:17) ∂ ∂E δ(E − H){F,H}G dΩ. All that remains is to write δ(E − H) dΩ = W(cid:18)(E) dλ on both sides. (cid:2) Applying the lemma to (9) produces δ(cid:23)Vj(cid:24) = 1 W(cid:18)(E) ∂ ∂E (cid:13) (cid:18) W (E) (cid:17) t −∞ ds(cid:23){H,H ◦ χst}ZVj ◦ ψts(cid:24) . (13) (cid:16) Now ∂ ∂s H ◦ χst = −{H,G ◦ π }M, Langevin Equation for Slow Degrees of Freedom of Hamiltonian Systems 97 so for times s out to some decorrelation time, which we supposed to be ε (cid:21) 1 (Assumption 6), we can write to leading order {H,H ◦ χst} = (t − s){H,{H,G ◦ π }M}Z. Specialising to G = Zk gives {H,G ◦ π }M = −Vk. So the integral in (13) becomes (cid:17) t −∞ ds (t − s)(cid:23){H,Vk}Z(s)Vj(t)(cid:24). To justify this approximation properly requires some hypothesis on the rate of 0 −∞ |tC(t)| dt < ∞ sufﬁces). decay of the correlation function of v (probably Now {H,Vk}Z = − dVk ds along the ﬂow of XHZ , so integration by parts (with again some assumption about sufﬁciently rapid convergence of the autocorrelation inte- gral) transforms the integral to (cid:19) (cid:17) t − −∞ ds(cid:23)(Vk(s) − (cid:23)Vk(cid:24))Vj(t)(cid:24) = −Djk, with D given by (2). Taking G to be an arbitrary linear combination of Zk yields δ(cid:23)V(t)(cid:24) = − (W(cid:18)D)(cid:18) W(cid:18) −1 ˙Z. J (14) This result agrees with [3], except that the term “f1” which they chose to neglect does not arise here. Perhaps I lost it through making a constant ˙Z approximation, or perhaps it really gives nothing to leading order. The derivation requires ˙Z to be small, since Ruelle’s formula is ﬁrst order. This is achieved for small enough ε, because the relevant notion of smallness of ˙Z is on the fast timescale. For k = m − n large, one can expect W(cid:18) to vary much more rapidly than D with energy E. In particular, under the assumption of Sect. 4.5 to come, W(cid:18)(E) ∼ eks(E/k), where s((cid:14)) is the entropy per fast degree of freedom as a function of the energy (cid:14) per fast degree of freedom. Then (14) can be approximated by −βDJ−1 ˙Z with β = ( log W (cid:18) (cid:18) ) , (15) the inverse (canonical) temperature (in distinction to the inverse microcanonical temperature ( log W)(cid:18), though they should be virtually the same for large k). Thus we obtain ˙Z = J∇f − βDJ −1 ˙Z (16) for the mean motion of Z. 98 R.S. MacKay Now invoke Assumption 8 of Sect. 2, which I’ll express explicitly as β(cid:29)DJ−1(cid:29) (cid:21) 1. Then (16) can be rewritten as ˙Z = (I + βDJ −1) −1J∇f ≈ (J − βD)∇f . (17) So the result of the correction is to modify the matrix representing the Poisson bracket. D can have an antisymmetric component, which just changes J to a differ- ent antisymmetric matrix (an effect called “geometric magnetism” by [3], though it is not clear to me whether the result automatically satisﬁes the Jacobi identity). Assuming β > 0, the symmetric part of D, being non-negative, produces damping because under (17), df (Z)/dt = −β∇ifDij∇jf ≤ 0 to ﬁrst order. Ruelle’s formula could also be used to determine the ﬁrst order change to the covariance of the ﬂuctuations from the mean velocity, but since we are considering the ﬂuctuations to already be ﬁrst order small it does not make sense to determine this second order effect on its own. In principle, the effects of deviations from conservation of WZ(E) should also be analysed; indeed, in the view of [25] they are responsible for the dissipation. 4.4 Effect of Autonomous Slow Motion In reality Z(t) does not move along a predetermined path but is driven by ˙Z = V, which depends on the choice of initial condition from λZ0,E0 . The difﬁ- culties induced by back-reaction of the slow motion on the fast variables have been addressed by Kifer in some contexts [14]. It seems reasonable to add the ﬂuctuations to the mean determined as above, but one ought to verify that correlations do not cause a further change of the same order. This produces nearly the claimed result (1), but with ∇f instead of ∇F and the interpretation of “=” unspeciﬁed. 4.5 Ergode to Monode For large number of fast degrees of freedom, the microcanonical free energy can be approximated by the canonical free energy (up to a possible constant), assuming a thermodynamic limit exists for the heat capacity. Here is a derivation. From (7), the canonical free energy for given β0 satisﬁes e−β0F(Z) = Z(E) dE, so W(cid:18) (cid:19) e−β0E (cid:17) −β0e −β0F∇F = −β0E∇W e (cid:18) dE. Integrating this by parts yields as −β0 (cid:19) e−β0EW(cid:18)∇f dE, where the E-dependence of f is via w0 = WZ(E). Thus β0e−β0E∇W dE, which by (6) can be written (cid:19) (cid:17) (cid:17) ∇F = −β0EW e (cid:18)∇f dE / −β0EW e (cid:18) dE. Langevin Equation for Slow Degrees of Freedom of Hamiltonian Systems 99 1 For the microcanonical ensmble at energy E, write the canonical temperature T(E) = 1/β(E) = 1/( log W(cid:18))(cid:18), from (15). For large k = m − n, assume the heat kT(cid:18)(k(cid:14)) as a function of the energy (cid:14) per capacity per degree of freedom c((cid:14)) = degree of freedom is positive and bounded uniformly in k (say for simplicity that the limit as k → ∞ exists). It follows by integration that β(E) = 1/T(E) is a function of (cid:14) nearly independent of k, and by another integration the same for s((cid:14)) = k log W(cid:18)(k(cid:14)), the entropy per degree of freedom. Then the function e−β0EW(cid:18)(E) of 1 E is approximately e−k(β0(cid:14)−s((cid:14))), which is sharply peaked around the (cid:14)0 such that s(cid:18)((cid:14)0) = β0 (because s(cid:18)(cid:18)((cid:14)) = − β2 < 0), i.e. β(E0) = β0 . Thus ∇F for β0 is c((cid:14)) approximated by ∇f for this E0. 4.6 Klimontovich Interpretation The Klimontovich interpretation [15] of the stochastic differential equation is as the limit as τ decreases to 0 of the discrete-time process Zi((n + 1)τ ) − Zi(nτ ) = τ (Jij − βDij)∇jF + σij(Z((n + 1)τ ))wj(n) (18) with wj(n) independent random steps of zero mean and variance τ . The distinguish- ing feature is that σ is evaluated at the end of a step rather than at the beginning (as for Ito) or averaged between the ends (as for Stratonovich). More formally, the Klimontovich interpretation is deﬁned as the Ito equation with added drift ∇jSji where S is the symmetric part of D. The differences between interpretations of the stochastic differential equation are probably beyond ﬁrst order, but there is a clear preference for Klimontovich inter- pretation, because it is the only one for which the measure e−βFΩN (the marginal on N of the canonical ensemble) is stationary if S depends on Z. This can be veriﬁed by substitution in (3). It was also understood by Hänggi [6]. 5 Case of Standard Mechanical System If N is a cotangent bundle T ∗L, the Hamiltonian has the form H(Q,P,z) = 1 2 PT M−1P+ h(Q,z) for slow degrees of freedom (Q,P) ∈ T ∗L and positive deﬁnite mass matrix j dQj ∧ dPj + ˜ω with ˜ω a symplectic M(Q), and the symplectic form is ω = form in z (possibly depending on Q and P), then the formulae simplify. In particular ˙Q = M−1P exactly, F takes the form F(Q,P) = 1 2 PT M−1P + G(Q) with G deﬁned by e−βG(Q) = e−βh(Q,z)Ω, D is independent of P, and Dij = 0 if any index refers to a component of Q. So for the rest of this section, D denotes just its PP-block. G is called the “potential of mean force”. Hence (cid:18) (cid:19) d(M(Q) ˙Q) = −(∇G + βD ˙Q)dt + σ dW. (19) 100 R.S. MacKay Note that this can be derived even without making the approximation used in (17). This simpler form of Langevin equation permits a further reduction in the “over- damped” case. Speciﬁcally, if D is invertible and the maximal rate of change of M, D and G along solutions is slow compared to the slowest damping rate β(cid:29)MD−1(cid:29)−1 then P relaxes onto a slow manifold and is thereafter slaved to the motion of Q, resulting to a good approximation in βDijdQj = −∇iG(Q) dt + σijdWj(t), or equivalently (with T = 1/β and taking D symmetric for simplicity) dQ = −TD −1∇G dt + 2Tσ −T dW (20) (21) (using Klimontovich interpretation again). For a proof see Theorem 10.1 of [24]. This is the form commonly used in biochemistry, e.g. [2, 21] and perhaps justiﬁes the idea of reactions following steepest descent curves on the free energy surface. Note that it produces Smoluchowski-Fokker-Planck equation (cid:11) = div ∂ρ ∂t T(D −1∇G)ρ + T 2D −1∇ρ (cid:12) , (22) with stationary measure e−βGdQ (dQ being volume on L). 6 Quantum Degrees of Freedom Quantum mechanics can be viewed as Hamiltonian. For Hermitian operator h on complex Hilbert space U, take the state space to be the projectivisation P(U) of U (i.e. the set of 1D complex subspaces), endowed with the Fubini-Study symplectic form [22], and take H(ψ) = (cid:23)ψ|hψ(cid:24)/(cid:23)ψ|ψ(cid:24). The resulting Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld gives Schrödinger evolution i dψ dt Alternatively, take M to be the dual of the Lie algebra of Hermitian operators on U with inner product (cid:23)A,B(cid:24) = Tr AB and its Lie-Poisson bracket, and H(A) = Tr hA. This gives von Neumann evolution idA/dt = [h,A]. = hψ. Thus one can incorporate quantum degrees of freedom in the above framework, for example electronic degrees of freedom involved in the conformation change of rhodopsin after absorbing a photon. There is the problem however that the quantum dynamics is not Anosov, so after all perhaps the approach of [8, 31] is more appropriate. Langevin Equation for Slow Degrees of Freedom of Hamiltonian Systems 101 7 Kinetics Out of Chemical Equilibrium The slow state space N can be a covering space. For example, its base can repre- sent the conformation of myosin and associated momenta, and the decks differ by the number of ATP molecules. This is the appropriate way to view a biomolecular system in thermal equilibrium but out of chemical equilibrium. Indeed such prob- lems motivated the present paper [20]. 8 Conclusion and Problems A strategy has been sketched to derive a Langevin equation for slow degrees of freedom of a Hamiltonian system, under suitable assumptions. It would be good to carry out this programme in full. I conclude with a few related problems for the future: • Examine the effect of the small measure exceptional set in Anosov’s averaging theorem. • Obtain higher accuracy by slightly different well selected choice of Z(0). • Determine the rank of S (degeneracies can arise only from coboundaries [4]), and conditions for hypoellipticity (e.g. [1]). • Attempt to extend the results beyond mixing Anosov fast dynamics. • Try to use the theory of partial hyperbolicity, because it can lead to ergodicity under fairly general circumstances [26]. • Adapt the approach for a constant pressure ensemble, e.g. by adding a heavy piston under gravity. • Investigate what to do if there is no gap in time-scales. • Study ways in which the result fails. This would be even more interesting than the whole current programme.

Stable chaos is a generalization of the chaotic behaviour exhibited by cellular automata to continuous-variable systems and it owes its name to an under- lying irregular and yet linearly stable dynamics. In this review we discuss analogies and differences with the usual deterministic chaos and introduce several tools for its characterization. Some examples of transitions from ordered behavior to sta- ble chaos are also analyzed to further clarify the underlying dynamical properties. Finally, two models are speciﬁcally discussed: the diatomic hard-point gas chain and a network of globally coupled neurons.

Chaos is associated with an exponential sensitivity of the evolution to tiny perturba- tions in the initial conditions, so that the presence of at least one positive Lyapunov exponent is considered as a necessary and sufﬁcient condition for the occurrence of irregular dynamics in deterministic dynamical systems [1]. In fact, the ﬁrst observa- tion in coupled-map models of stochastic-like behaviour accompanied by a negative maximum Lyapunov exponent came as a big surprise [2, 3]. In order to highlight the unexpected coexistence of local stability and chaotic behaviour, the phenomenon was called stable chaos (SC). Although the deﬁnition sounds like an oxymoron, in practice, there is no logical inconsistency, as the irregular behaviour is a transient phenomenon that is restricted to ﬁnite-time scales. In spite of this restriction, SC is both a well deﬁned and meaningful concept, because the transient duration diverges exponentially with the system size and is therefore inﬁnite in the thermodynamic limit. Moreover, the stationarity of SC [3] suggests that it can represent an interest- ing platform for studying non-equilibrium phenomena. A better understanding of SC can be gained by exploring the analogy with the chaotic behaviour exhibited by elementary cellular automata [4], another phenomenon that can be formally deﬁned only in the thermodynamic limit. In fact, as we clarify in this review, SC is a sort of extension of cellular-automaton dynamics to continuous-variable systems. In partic- ular, the spreading velocity of localized perturbations, a standard indicator used to quantify the degree of chaoticity in cellular automata, proves rather fruitful also to characterize SC. However, in this latter case it is necessary to distinguish between ﬁnite and inﬁnitesimal perturbations (the latter ones cannot even be deﬁned in cel- lular automata, because of the discreteness of the local variable) and it is thereby possible to deﬁne two conceptually different propagation velocities. This allows giving a fairly general deﬁnition of SC as that of a dynamics dominated by “ﬁnite amplitude” pertubations [5, 6]. Altogether, one can express the relevant difference between deterministic chaos and SC by referring to the relevant ﬂux of information: while in the former context, information ﬂows from the least towards the most signiﬁcant digits, in the latter, it ﬂows from the boundaries towards the core of the system. It would be there- fore desirable to develop a general formalism able to encompass both phenomena. A promising idea is based on the introduction of “non democratic” norms which attribute increasingly small weights to the sites that are increasingly “far” from the region of interest. Although this approach allows quantifying the spatial information ﬂow, it can be hardly extended to account for perturbations that have locally a ﬁnite amplitude, the analysis of which would require a genuine nonlinear treatment. In fact, a tool like ﬁnite amplitude Lyapunov exponents (FALEs) [7] appears to be more appropriate for characterizing SC, although it is not clear how to go beyond the maximal exponent (for the absence of a proper scalar product deﬁnition in this context). As we have mentioned above, in systems with a ﬁnite number of degrees of freedom, SC is a transient phenomenon. One might therefore think of using tools and ideas developed for the characterization of transients such as those extensively discussed in the nice review by Tèl and Lai [8]. One must however distinguish between SC and standard chaotic transients (for a seminal paper on the subject, see [9]). In the former case, the maximum Lyapunov exponent is positive and for- mulas such as Kapral-Yorke and Pesin relations can be invoked to express some properties of the invariant measure in terms of the Lyapunov exponents [10]. In SC, a straightforward application of the same formulas yields manifestly useless predictions, as they do not take into account the spatial information ﬂow that is the key mechanism of SC. Accordingly, one must still heavily rely on direct numerical simulations to infer the structure of the invariant measure. Nevertheless, we suspect that a possible common property of chaotic transients and SC is the presence of a strange repeller. In fact, chaotic transients are almost by deﬁnition the manifestation of trajectories evolving in the vicinity of a repeller, possibly characterized by a small escape rate [8, 10]. This property seems to clash with the absense of unstable orbits in most of the models exhibiting SC. However, such models are also characterized by discontinuities in phase-space and here below we argue that their smoothing gives birth to a web of unstable orbits. We are thereby lead to conjecture that even Stable Chaos 105 though SC is accompanied by a negative Lyapunov exponent, its very existence requires the presence of topological chaos, i.e. of a ﬁnite topological entropy. When and whether the resulting transient dynamics is linearly stable or unstable remains however to be clariﬁed. The review is organized in the following way. In Sect. 2 we brieﬂy introduce the reference models that have been mostly used to characterize SC. In Sect. 3 we properly deﬁne SC from the scaling behaviour of the transient length and discuss its properties in terms of space-time correlations and fractal dimensions. Then, in Sect. 4, we discuss the relationship with cellular automata by suitably encoding the space-time pattern. In particular, we focus our attention on the indeterminacy of the next symbol as a way to quantify the difference between the original dynamics and that of a suitable deteministic automaton rule. We also introduce and estimate the propagation velocity of localized perturbations. In Sect. 5, we compare SC with the usual deterministic chaos. This is done by smoothing an otherwise discontinuous coupled-map model and studying the dependence of standard indicators such as the maximum Lyapunov exponent on the smoothness of the dynamic rule. As a result, we identify two thresholds: (i) the ﬁrst one separates the regions with postive and negative Lyapunov exponent; (ii) the second, larger, threshold separates the region where ﬁnite-amplitude perturbations propagate faster than inﬁnitesimal ones, from that where the two velocities coincide with one another (which is the signature of a standard chaotic evolution). Moreover, we compute the multifractal spectrum of the Lyapunov exponent, showing that it has a positive tail even when the average exponent itself is negative. In Sect. 6 we discuss various order-to-chaos transitions. In fact, the analogy with cellular automata reminds us that such rules are not neces- sarily chaotic. The intrinsic absence of a continuous parameter makes it impossible to investigate order-to-chaos transitions in the cellular-automata context. As this restriction does not apply to SC, it makes sense and it is desirable to investigate the onset of chaotic dynamics in this latter context. We ﬁrst study a coupled-map lattice, the coupling strength being the relevant control parameter. The analysis reveals the existence of a fuzzy transition region, where regular and irregular dynamics alternate in a complex manner [11]. A simple stochastic model is then introduced to gain some further insight. In the new setup, the transition is of directed-percolation type [12]. For a long time, SC has been found only in abstract mathematical models, char- acterized by the presence of discontinuities or nearly discontinuous1 evolution rules. This restriction has therefore casted some doubts on the physical relevance of this phenomenon. In Sect. 7 we discuss a mechanism that can generically lead to dis- continuities in physically meaningful contexts. The mechanisms requires just the presence of δ-like events such elastic collisions between particles or spike emissions by neurons. The “non-commutativity” of such events represents a genuine source of discontinuities, which may, in turn, give rise to SC. A diatomic hard-point gas and a network of coupled neurons are discussed in Sect. 7 as examples of such dynam- 1 See the next section for a clariﬁcation of this concept. 106 A. Politi and A. Torcini ical systems. The neural network model allows us also to discuss an order-to-chaos transition that appears to be of “standard” type (the critical region reduces to a single point), although the universality class has not yet been identiﬁed [13]. Finally the still open problems are brieﬂy summarised in Sect. 8. 2 Models Most of the numerical studies of stable chaos have been carried out in a 1D lattice of diffusively coupled maps [14], xi(t + 1) = (1 − ε)f (xi(t)) + (cid:9) f (xi−1(t) + f (xi+1(t)) (cid:10) ε 2 (1) where ε ∈ [0:1] is the coupling constant and the map of the interval f is piecewise linear, ⎧ ⎪⎨ ⎪⎩ f (x) = p1x + q1 1 − (1 − q2)(x − xc)/η xx < x < xc + η xc + η < x ≤ 1, q2 + p2(x − xc − η) 0 ≤ x ≤ xc (2) (cid:6) (cid:5) (cid:5) x− c where xc = (1−q1)/p1. The model [5] is a continuous generalization of the systems analysed in [2, 3], which basically correspond to η = 0, i.e. to a two-branch maps. The map is continuous because the left and right limits in both connecting points do = f . Occasionally in this review coincide we speak of “quasi-discontinuous” models, implying the presence of large but local- ized (in phase-space) amplifying regions. In this context, this amounts to assuming a small but non-zero width η for the middle branch. In next the section we restrict our analysis to the case η = 0. (cid:5) x+ c (cid:5) x− c (cid:5) x+ c = f + η + η (cid:6)(cid:6) , f (cid:6) (cid:6) f Since this model is rather artiﬁcial (no speciﬁc physical problem lies behind the choice of f , which has been mostly selected for simplicity reasons and for coherence with the seminal paper [15]), we ﬁnd it convenient to consider a second type of model, namely a chain of Dufﬁng oscillators ¨xi = −γ ˙xi − x3 i + D(xi−1 + xi+1) + (1 + G(t) sin 2π t/T1)xi (3) where γ controls the dissipation, D the diffusion between nearby sites and G(t) is the modulation amplitude that is periodically switched on and off; G = A for mod (t,T) < T1 and zero otherwise. As discussed in [4], for T2 long enough, the Lya- punov exponent is negative, so that the evolution must eventually converge towards a periodic orbit, as it indeed does. Stable Chaos 107 3 Deﬁnition and Characterization of Stable Chaos Simulations of the above deﬁned map have revealed the existence of long-lasting transients followed by a sudden convergence towards some periodic orbit. This suggests, and simulations conﬁrm, that the basin of attraction of such orbits is so intricate that the convergence is exponential only for distances homogeneously smaller than some threshold θ . However, since there exist many different periodic orbits, one cannot estimate the transient length by determining the distance from an a priori unknown ﬁnal state. One can nevertheless determine the distance d(t,τ ) of the conﬁguration {xi(t)} (i = 1, N) at time t from any previous conﬁguration at time τ < t. As soon as there exists a τ -value such d(tc,τ ) < θ , we can conclude that d(t+t (cid:18),τ +t (cid:18)) will tend to 0, indicating that the dynamics converges towards an orbit of period t − τ . As shown in Fig. 1, the average (over different choices of the ini- tial conditions) transient time may increase exponentially with the chain length, i.e. with the phase space dimension. This indicates that in the thermodynamic limit, the relevant dynamical regime is not the asymptotic periodic behavior that is practically unreachable, but what one would naively consider a transient regime. This scenario is reminiscent of the disordered regime in directed percolation, which, in ﬁnite sys- tems, has necessarily a ﬁnite lifetime, as the dynamics sooner or later is absorbed by the homogeneous state [16, 17]. Irrespective of this difﬁculty, the disordered regime is a true “phase” in the statistical-mechanics sense, as it is stable in inﬁnite systems, i.e. when the thermodynamic limit is taken before the inﬁnite-time limit. It should, however, be noticed that in SC the “absorbing state” is not just a single homogenous conﬁguration, but may be a set of different and possibly exponentially long orbits. A second striking character of the transient is that the maximum Lyapunov expo- nent turns out to be negative. Like for the very existence of SC, this statement is 107 106 105 104 103 102 t n e i s n a r t e g a r e v a 20 30 40 50 N Fig. 1 Average transient duration versus the chain length for the diffusively coupled lattice of maps (2), for p1 = 2.7, q1 = 0, η = 0, q2 = 0.07, p2 = 0.1, and for the coupling strength ε = 2/3 108 A. Politi and A. Torcini formally correct only under the assumption of taking ﬁrst the thermodynamic limit. In practice, it is sufﬁcient that the transient duration is long enough to guarantee a good statistical convergence. From the data reported in Fig. 1, one can see that this is not a limitation at all, since already in a lattice of 100 maps, the periodic state is practically unreachable. The very fact that the transient is Lyapunov-stable makes it substantially dif- ferent from the chaotic transients that have been often found and attributed to the existence of some chaotic saddle of high dimensionality [8]. This is all the way more surprising once we notice that the “transient” dynamics is far from regular. In fact, simulations reveal that both spatial and temporal correlations decay exponentially. An example is reported in Fig. 2, where we plot C( j ) = |(cid:23)xi(t)xi+j(t)(cid:24)| (cid:23)xi(t)2(cid:24) , C(τ ) = |(cid:23)xi(t)xi(t + τ )(cid:24)| (cid:23)xi(t)2(cid:24) (4) where (cid:23)·(cid:24) denotes an ensemble average It is natural to characterize the invariant measure also in terms of its fractal dimension. Since the whole Lyapunov spectrum is negative, one cannot invoke the Kaplan-Yorke [18] formula to predict the number of active degrees of freedom. Actually, such a formula would imply that the dimension is equal to zero and this is in fact true for the asymptotic attractor. Therefore, we must rely only on direct numerical computations. More precisely, we have decided to compute the correla- tion dimension [19] of spatial sequences of variables [20]. In other words, we have constructed embedding spaces of the type xi(t), xi+1(t), . . . , xi+e−1 (t), for e = 1, 2, 3. In each case, we have counted the number of pairs of points N (e, δ) that are sep- arated by a distance larger than (cid:31) in a space of dimension e. Afterwards, we have determined the dimension as the effective derivative, i.e. D2(e,(cid:31)) = ∂ log N ∂ log (cid:31) (5) 100 ) τ ( C , ) j ( C 10–1 10–2 Fig. 2 Spatial and temporal (smoother curve) correlations for the same parameter values of the single map as in Fig. 1 and ε = 0.608 10–3 0 10 20 j , τ/10 30 40 Stable Chaos 109 D2 D2 3 2 1 0 4 3 2 1 0 10–7 10–6 10–5 10–4 10–3 Δ 10–2 10–1 100 Fig. 3 Correlation dimension of the spatial embedding for ε = 0.6008 (upper panel) and ε = 0.608 (lower panel). Dotted, dashed and solid curves correspond to embedding dimension e = 1, 2, and 3, respectively Formally, the correlation dimension is the limit of D2(e,(cid:31)) for (cid:31) → 0. As for small (cid:31), N is affected by statistical ﬂuctuations due to the ﬁnite number of points, the relevant question is whether the limiting behaviour sets in for distances that are numerically accessible. In Fig. 3 we report the results for two different values of the coupling strength, ε = 0.6008 and ε = 0.608, which correspond to an ordered and chaotic regime, respectively. Even in the ordered regime, the fractal dimension is ﬁnite, as revealed by the plateau, whose height is independent of the embed- ding dimension. The non-zero value of the dimension reﬂects the disordered spatial structure, i.e. the existence of spatial chaos. Therefore, already from this simple case we can conclude on the necessity to go beyond the standard Lypapunov-exponent analysis. In the chaotic regime, the effective dimension is larger and grows with the embedding dimension e (see lower panel in Fig. 3). However, in the absence of theoretical arguments, we cannot deﬁnitely conclude whether the dimension will saturate for e → ∞, indicating the existence of a low-dimensional attractor, or whether it diverges, suggesting some form extensivity [20]. 4 Relationship with Cellular Automata The existence of a stochastic-like dynamics accompanied by an exponential con- traction of inﬁnitesimally close trajectories suggests an analogy with the so-called chaotic cellular automata (CA) rules [21]. In fact, in a ﬁnite lattice, any CA rule must eventually produce a periodic orbit, since the number of distinct states is ﬁnite, namely BN, where B is the number of states of the local variable and N is 110 A. Politi and A. Torcini Fig. 4 Two patterns generated by iterating Eq. (1) with the function f deﬁned as in Eq. (2) with the same parameter values as in the previous ﬁgures and coupling strength ε = 0.55 (left panel) and 0.7 (right panel). Time ﬂows downwards; black corresponds to xi(t) < 1/2 the number of lattice sites. What makes a chaotic rule different from an ordered one is precisely the time needed to cycle through previously visited states: such a time is exponentially long in chaotic rules [21]. A binary representation of the dynamics observed in the the coupled map lat- tice (1) conﬁrms these expectations. The pattern plotted in Fig. 4 are indeed very reminiscent of those obtained by iterating CA rules. The relationship with CA can be put on more ﬁrm grounds, as we discuss in the following with reference to the chain of Dufﬁng oscillators (3). The bistable character of the single oscillators suggests a natural way to encode the underalying dynamics and thereby to explore possible connections with CA rules. An appropri- ate indicator to do so is the indeterminacy Δh(m) of the symbol s (cid:18) = si(t + 1), under the assumption that the sequence S(m) = {si−r(t), si−r+1(t), . . . , si(t), . . . , si+r(t)}, is observed at time t (time being measured in periods of the forcing term) and where m = 2r + 1. The indeterminacy is formally deﬁned as [22] (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:18)|S(m)) log P(s (cid:18)|S(m)) (6) Δh(m) = P(S(m)) P(s S s(cid:18) where the ﬁrst sum extends over all sequences of length m generated by the chain dynamics, and the second sum to the two values of the symbol s(cid:18). P(S(m)) is the probability to observe anywhere the sequence S(m); P(s(cid:18)|S(m)) is the conditional probability that the observation of the symbol s(cid:18) at time t +1 on the site i is preceded by the sequence S at time t in a window of length m centered around the site i. When the knowledge of S(m) allows to perfectly predict s(cid:18), then the indeterminacy is zero. In this case, the symbolic dynamics is perfectly equivalent to that of a CA deﬁned over a window of length m. In Fig. 5 we report the data for T2 = 8, 18 and 20. (cid:31)h is a non decreasing function of m, since the more we assume to know on the past, Stable Chaos Fig. 5 Indeterminacy in the chain of Dufﬁng oscillators (3) with γ = 0.103, D = 0.0263, ω = 0.56, T1 = T2/16 and T2 = 8, 18, 20 (from top to bottom) ) m ( h Δ 10 0 –1 10 –2 10 –3 10 –4 10 –5 10 111 0 5 10 15 20 25 m the smaller must be the uncertainty on the future. If (cid:31)h becomes exactly equal to 0 for a ﬁnite m, then we can conclude that the dynamics is perfectly reconstructible from a CA with a ﬁnite interaction range. In all cases we see that for m larger than 15, the curves saturate revealing the existence of a residual uncertainty. This does neither imply that the dynamics contains some degree of stochasticity, nor that the model has to include longer memory terms. One striking such example was dis- cussed in [22], where Crutchiﬁeld applied this approach to the pattern generated by an elementary CA, after it was suitably encoded. The indeterminacy of the encoded pattern revealed the presence of a residual uncertainty even though the CA rule is deterministic and requires only the memory of one past step, while the encoding is even memoryless. The identiﬁcation of the “optimal machine” in generic cases is a typical example of the hardness of inverse problems. The analogy with CA suggests to quantify the degree of chaos also in SC by determining the velocity vF of propagation of perturbations. Let us consider two conﬁgurations that initially differ in the interval [−r, r] and let il(t) (ir(t)) denote the leftmost (rightmost) site where they differ more than some threshold. Accordingly, we can deﬁne the front velocity as vF = lim t→∞ ir − il 2t . (7) Within CAs, a ﬁnite spreading velocity is considered as an evidence of chaotic behaviour [21]. In fact, this is true also in the context of SC, as it can be seen in Fig. 6, where we plot the spreading of an initial difference for parameter values that correspond to ordered and irregular behaviour. There we see that the perturbation spreads only in the latter case (see the right panel). In the CA language, the velocity vf is often named the “Lyapunov exponent” [21]. In fact the evolution equation of an elementary CA can be formally written as a mapping of R2 into itself, ul(t + 1) = Fl(ul(t), ur(t)) ur(t + 1) = Fr(ul(t), ur(t)) (8) 112 Fig. 6 Propagation of initially localized perturbations in the coupled map lattice for the same values as in Fig. 4. Time ﬂows downwards A. Politi and A. Torcini (cid:18) (cid:18) ≥0 si(t)2−i, ul(t) = i<0 si(t)2i and si(t) = 0,1 (for the sake of where ur(t) = simplicity we refer to binary automata). In general Fl and Fr are highly singular functions, but this does not forbids to deﬁne a sort of Lyapunov exponent from the growth rate of an arbitrarily small perturbation δ. In practice, if two conﬁgurations differ only in the interval [ − r, r], we can equivalently say that the representation points in R2 are separated by a distance δ ≈ 2−r. Moreover, if the size of the spatial region where the two conﬁgurations differ increases with a velocity vf , we can state that the R2 distance grows as exp [(vf log 2)t], thus conﬁrming that, apart from a multiplicative factor, the velocity plays the role of a Lyapunov exponent. In coupled map lattices, the local variable is continuous rather than binary, but this does not change the substance of the argument. 5 Relationship with Deterministic Chaos The original model where SC has been observed for the ﬁrst time has a peculiarity, namely, the discontinuity of the mapping [3]. As a result, the distance between two arbirarily close trajectories can suddenly become of order O(1), when they ﬁnd themselves on opposite sides of the discontinuity. It is therefore reasonable to study the continuous version of the model, i.e. to assume η (cid:6)= 0 in (2). In the limit η → 0, the map (2) reduces to the original discontinuous system. Already at the level of the single map (i.e. without invoking any spatial coupling), the introduction of an additional branch may drastically modify the structure of the corresponding dynamical system. This is clear in the simple case q1 = q2 = 0, p1 = p2 = 2. For η = 0, the topological entropy is H = ln 2, as the map corresponds to the Bernoulli shift; however, for any arbitrarily small, but ﬁnite, η-value, the appearance of a third branch induces a jump to H = ln 3. For the parameter values that correspond to the SC regime discussed in the previous section, the consequence Stable Chaos 113 of a ﬁnite η-value is even more striking, as H is strictly equal to zero for η = 0, while it is ﬁnite for η = 0+. This can be understood, by performing a slightly nonconven- tional symbolic analysis. Let us start by recalling that for the original parameter values, there exists a stable period-3 orbit (x1, x2, x3), whose points are ordered as q2 < x1 < x2 < xc < xc + η < x3 < 1. Because of the third contracting branch, the interval [x3,1] is asymptotically squeezed to a point, so that we can identify the rightmost point x3, with the right border of asymptotically distinct trajectories. Analogously, the interval [q2, x1] is also squeezed to zero and we can accordingly interpret x1 as the left border of the relevant interval. Finally [xc + η, x3] is also squeezed to zero and can be neglected as well. As a result, the relevant dynamics is described by the mapping of I1 = [x1, x2] and I2 = [xc, xc + η]: f (I1) = I2 while f (I2) = I1 ∪ I2. It is easy to show that the corresponding topological entropy is 5)/2]. Therefore, we can at least conclude that the golden mean H = log [(1 + the introduction of a ﬁnite but arbitrarily small η induces topological chaos in an otherwise stable environment. √ In the single map, the existence of a fractal chaotic repellor can induce long transients only for those trajectories that are carefully selected in the vicinity of the repellor itself. It is reasonable to conjecture that in spatially extended systems, the stable manifold of the repellor forces generic trajectories to follow an intricate arrangement of “channels” before landing on some periodic orbits. What are, how- ever, the dynamical properties of the lattice, when ﬁnite η-values are assumed? First of all, it important to notice that while the topological enropy jumps abruptely to a ﬁnite value, the Lyapunov exponent exhibits a smooth behaviour (see Fig. 7), i.e. for sufﬁciently small η-values (η < η∗ < 3.10−4) it stays negative. This implies that the phenomenon of SC is generic (in the mathematical sense), even though the window of existence is (at least in this context) rather narrow. More accurate information can be extracted by performing a multifractal analysis of the Lyapunov exponent [23, 24]. In particular, we have computed the probability 0.1 0.05 0 λ –0.05 –0.1 –0.15 –0.2 0 0.0002 0.0004 η 0.0006 0.0008 0.001 Fig. 7 Maximum Lyapunov exponent of the map lattice (2) as a function of η, while the other parameter values are the same as in Fig. 1. The results have been obtained for N = 200, but are practically independent of the system size 114 A. Politi and A. Torcini Fig. 8 Multifractal distribution of Lyapunov exponents for η = 1.10−4, where the average Lyapunov exponent is still negative t / ) t , λ ( P n l 0.1 0 –0.1 –0.2 –0.3 –0.4 –0.5 –0.5 t = 20 t = 40 0 λ 0.5 distribution P(λ, t) of the maximum Lyapunov exponent λ over a time span t. For sufﬁciently large t, the probability P(λ, t) is expected to scale as P(λ, t) = exp [ − G(λ)t] where G is a dynamical invariant whose operative deﬁnition is obtained by inverting this scaling relation, G = −( log P)/t. In Fig. 8 we have plotted the results obtained for t = 20 and 40. Even though the most probable and average Lyapunov exponent is negative (the spectra refer to η = 10−4 < η∗), there is a positive tail, in agreement with the conjectured existence of a web of unstable orbits. The smoothed steps on the right of the maximum correspond to the number of times a sample trajectory is actually visiting the expanding branch. The two spectra do reasonably overlap, suggesting that the time t = 40 is already in the scaling regime, although ﬁnite-size corrections are still large (notice, in fat, that the maximum of G has to be, by deﬁnition, equal to 0). Altogether, SC appears to be somehow complementary to the blow-out phe- nomenon discovered in the study of synchronization transitions [25]. While analysing the stability of the synchronization manifold, it has been discovered that in some circumstances, the corresponding (multifractal) Lyapunov spectrum altough mostly conﬁned to the negative semi-axis, may exhibit a positive tail. In such a case, one has to go beyond the linear stability analysis, because whenever the distance is ampliﬁed, nonlinear terms are responsible for either bringing the trajectory back towards the manifold or letting it escape away. In the context of SC, nonlinear terms bring the trajectory back towards the “invariant manifold”, although the mechanism is perfectly efﬁcient only in the inﬁnite dimensional limit. In order to clarify the mechanisms by which nonlinearities contribute to stabi- lizing the chaotic dynamics, it is convenient to analyse the propagation of perturba- tions. We start by brieﬂy recalling the concept of convective Lyapunov exponents [26]. Given a unidimensional lattice model in the stationary regime, let us introduce a δ-like perturbation at time t = 0 in the origin i = 0 and imagine to monitor the perturbation amplitude wi(t). Kaneko and Deissler [26] suggested that wi(t) = exp [ (i/t)t] (9) Stable Chaos 115 where  (v) represents the (exponential) growth rate of a perturbation in a frame moving with the velocity v. It is a priori obvious that for v = 0, one recovers the usual Lyapunov exponent, and that for large velocities one has to expect negative growth rates. In fact,  (v) has a typically parabolic shape with the maximum in zero. All velocities for which  (v) > 0 correspond to growing perturbations. The limit velocity for linearly propagating perturbations is ﬁxed by the marginal stability criterion  (vL) = 0. Instead of determining directly  (v), it is more convenient to exploit the chronotopic approach set in [27, 28], and formally introduce a perturba- tion with a spatial ampliﬁcation factor wi(t) = e −μiui(t) (10) In our lattice model, the evolution rule for ui(t) reads ui(t + 1, μ) = ε −μif e (cid:18) 2 (1 − ε)f (xi−1(t))ui−1(t, μ) + (cid:18) (xi(t))ui(t, μ) + ε 2 (cid:18) μif e (xi+1(t))ui+1(t, μ) (11) By iterating this recursive equation with suitable boundary conditions (periodic conditions are typically optimal, as they reduce ﬁnite-size effects), we obtain the chronotopic growth rate λ(μ). Altogether, an inﬁnitesimal perturbation wi(t) = exp [λ(μ)t − μi] with a spatial growth rate μ grows in time with an exponent λ(μ). The evolution of the initially localized perturbation is connected to λ(μ) by a Leg- endre transform (v) = λ(μ) − μλ(cid:18) (μ); v = λ(cid:18) (12) In order to determine the velocity corresponding to a given μ-value, it is necessary to compute the derivative of λ(μ). Since the numerical computation of derivates is always affected by large numerical errors, it is convenient to perform a few more analytical steps [27]. By introducing, ui(t, μ + dμ) = ui(t, i) + zi(t, μ)dμ (13) in the recursive relation (11), we obtain an equation for the deviation zi(t, μ), zi(t + 1,μ) = ε 2 −μif e (cid:18) (xi−1(t))(zi−1(t, μ) − ui−1(t, μ)) (xi(t))ui(t, μ) + (cid:18) + (1 − ε)f − ui+1(t, μ)) . ε 2 (cid:18) μif e (xi+1(t))(zi+1(t, μ) (14) The knowledge of zi and of ui allows determining λ(cid:18). In fact, by taking the μ deriva- tive in the deﬁnition of the chronotopic Lyapunov exponent, 116 A. Politi and A. Torcini one obtains λ(μ) = 1 2 lim t→∞ ||u(t)||2 t λ(cid:18) (μ) = lim t→∞ u(t) · z(t) t||u(t)||2 (15) (16) where · stands for the scalar product. In order to better understand the selection process of the propagation velocity, it is convenient to go back to the evolution of a single exponential proﬁle wi(t) = exp [λ(μ)t − μi]. Its velocity is obviously V(μ) = λ/μ. From the Legendre transform we have that dV dμ = 1 μ (cid:13) (cid:16) dλ dμ − λ μ = − μ2 . (17) Since the perturbation velocity is identiﬁed by the equation   = 0, we see also that it corresponds to the minimum of V(μ0). In other words, as long as the evolution is controlled by linear mechanisms, the slowest among all possible fronts is selected. Let us now turn our attention to fronts delimiting ﬁnite perturbations. Since even such fronts must have a leading inﬁnitesimal edge, vF will be vF(μ∗) for some μ∗. It is hard to imagine that μ∗ is smaller than μ0: accordingly, either vF = vL or vF > vL. This scenario is perfectly conﬁrmed by the study of the model (2). Solid and dashed curves in Fig. 9 correspond to vF and VL, respectively. There we see that vF is strictly larger than vL for η < ηc ≈ 1.210−3, while above ηc the two coincide within numerical accuracy. One can also notice that the linear velocity is not deﬁned for η < η∗, where the system is linearly stable and no propagation of inﬁnitesimal perturbations can occur. As discussed in [6], the mechanism responsible for the ﬁnite difference between vL and vF is that perturbations of increasing amplitude (starting from inﬁnitesimal ones) tend to propagate faster and thereby to push the corresponding front. These 0.6 0.4 0.2 v η * 0 0 Fig. 9 Linear (vL, solid curve) and front (vF, dashed curve) velocity versus η. Deterministic chaos exists only for η > η∗. Beyond ηc, vL = vF η c 0.005 η 0.01 0.015 Stable Chaos 117 results are indeed fairly general and not just restricted to the model considered in this section [29]. Moreover, this phenomenology is conceptually equivalent to that observed in the context of front propagation (see, e.g. fronts connecting steady states in reaction-diffusion systems [30, 31]), that is effectively described by the famous Fisher-Kolmogorov-Petrovsky – Piskunov equation [32]. Altogether we can conclude by stating that the front velocity proves to be a use- ful indicator to identify the presence of SC (in spatially extended systems) from the presence of nonlinear propagation mechanisms that cannot be accounted for by linear stability analysis [6]. In such a sense, the results in Fig. 9 indicate that SC persists up to the second threshold and not just to the ﬁrst one [5]. 6 From Order to Chaos Once ascertained that SC is a sort of extension of CA chaos to systems characterized by continuous variables, it is natural to investigate the possible phase transitions, a question that cannot even be posed in CAs, where all variables are discrete. The front propagation velocity vF provides the right tool to assess the relative stability of the two phases. Let us, in fact, consider two initial conditions: a reference trajectory (cid:8) (cid:7) , and a perturbed one {xi} differing only in a ﬁnite interval −L < i < L, where x0 i it is randomly set. If the interval where v(i) is of order O(1) increases by eating the region where the ﬁeld was initially equal to zero, we can conclude that the chaotic phase is thermodynamically stable. In Fig. 10 we plot the results of careful computations performed with the coupled map lattice (1) for different values of the coupling strength ε. The ε-range has been selected so as to include both the ordered and the chaotic phase. In fact, we see that the front velocity is equal to zero (ﬁnite) in the left (right) part of the ﬁgure. How- ever, these two clearly distinct phases are not separated by a point-like transition. We ﬁnd instead a fuzzy region, where chaos and order alternate in a seemingly irregular vF 0.2 0.1 Fig. 10 Front propagation velocity in the coupled map lattice (1,2) for the same parameter values as in Fig. 1 0 0.595 0.6 ε 0.605 0.61 118 A. Politi and A. Torcini manner. Is this an evidence of the complexity that is sometimes invoked to exist at the edge of chaos? Pure numerics alone is not sufﬁcient to provide a convincing answer to such a difﬁcult question. An exact formulation and solution of this problem requires to control simultane- ously two trajectories, a task that is nearly impossible. A simpler formulation which can nevertheless help to gain some insight on the transition consists in assuming a random evolution for the reference trajectory, and thus reducing the problem to that of characterizing the stochastic evolution of the difference ﬁeld vi(t) [12]. In mathematical terms, this amounts to studying the equation, vi(t + 1) = (1 − ε)wi(t + 1) + ε 2 [wi−1(t + 1) + wi+1(t + 1))] (18) where (cid:24) (cid:24) wi(t + 1) = wi(t + 1) = vi(t)/η w.p. w.p. avi(t) p = aη 1 − p 1 w.p. avi(t) w.p. p = avi(t) 1 − p if vi(t) < η if vi(t) ≥ η (19) (20) The stochastic 1/η ampliﬁcation simulates the effect of visiting the expanding inter- val of the map (2). The ampliﬁcation saturates to take into account the boundedness of the dynamics. This is the only element breaking the linearity of vi(t) dynamics. Moreover, for the sake of simplicity, we assume that a uniform contraction rate a (an assumption that is basically equivalent to set p1 = p2 < 1). At variance with the original deterministic model, here a detailed numerical analysis of the parameter space (a,η), reveals that ordered and chaotic phases are separated by a standard phase transition (see Fig. 11) that belongs to the directed percolation (DP) type for 1 a 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.6 0.5 0 Fig. 11 Phase diagram of the stochastic model Eq. (20) Ordered phase 0.2 0.4 η 0.6 0.8 1 Stable Chaos 119 small enough values of η [33] and seems to be of multiplicative noise type beyond some critical η value [34]. Notice that this stochastic model is even more closely related to the problem of synchronization between mutually coupled map lattices (see [35–40] for a more detailed discussion), since the assumption of a stochastic evolution is appropri- ate everywhere in parameter space including the critical region separating the two phases. In the SC context, the DP transition is the most relevant one, as it occurs precisely in the regime where the evolution is characterized by a negative Lyapunov exponent. DP was introduced and is usually discussed in systems where the local variable has just two states: 0, and 1. Moreover, the dynamical rule is such that 1’s cannot spontaneously appear in a sea of 0’s. This is the key difference with respect to the present context, where the variable vi is continuous and thereby the 0-state is never perfectly reached (in ﬁnite times). It is therefore necessary to introduce a threshold to decide whether the 0-state has been reached, with the related problem of having to clarify whether the results are truly independent of the threshold. In order to settle this issue, we ﬁnd it convenient to determine the Finite Amplitude Lyapunov Exponent (FALE) [7]. We do so by ﬁrst introducing τ (W), the average time needed by the ﬁeld norm ||w(t)|| = 1 L L(cid:3) i |wi| (21) to become for the ﬁrst time smaller than a preassigned threshold W. The FALE can be thereby deﬁned with reference to a sequence of exponentially spaced thresholds Wn (Wn/Wn−1 = r < 1) as In the limit r → 1 (Wn) = log r τ (Wn+1 − Wn) . (W) = (cid:14) dτ (W) d log W (cid:15)−1 . (22) (23) In the further limit W → 0,  (W) reduces to the usual Lyapunov exponent. In Fig. 12, we see that the FALE while being almost equal to zero at sufﬁciently large scales, becomes equal to the true Lyapunov exponent below a certain thresh- old Wc. Accordingly, since for W < Wc, the dynamics is dominated by the usual Lyapunov exponent, we can safely conclude that when the norm becomes smaller than Wc, the absorbing state will be reached with probability one and this solves the problem of an unambigious identiﬁcation of the threshold. Moreover, detailed numerical simulations have revealed that Wc decreases faster than 1/L, where L is the system size [33]. In discrete-variable systems, the minimal non-zero value A. Politi and A. Torcini 120 Fig. 12 Finite amplitude Lyapunov exponent of the stochastic model for two different sets of parameter values, both at criticality: circles refer to (cid:31) = 0.01, L = 256, ac = 0.6055, squares to (cid:31) = 0, L = 128, and ac = 0.6063 0.1 0 –0.1 –0.2 –0.3 –0.4 –0.5 Λ 10–10 10–8 10–6 W 10–4 10–2 100 that W can meaningfully take is 1/L (which corresponds to just one active site). As Wc < 1/L, one can conclude that in this stochastic system the scaling range is even broader than in usual discrete systems. Now a comment about the reason why the linear stability analysis may not apply at vanishing distances. In fact, when the above deﬁned norm of a vector is small, the ﬁeld can nevertheless be sporadically of O(1). The behaviour of such bursts may represent an obstruction to the validity of the linear stability analysis and this is what tells Fig. 12. Finally, we recall that FALE have been employed to characterize single maps of the type (2) revealing that for sufﬁciently small η and for some ﬁnite W, the FALE is indeed larger (positive) than the standard Lyapunov exponent [29]. Moreover, a generalization of the FALE to a comoving reference frame allows to formulate a marginal stability criterion that is able to predict the velocity on both cases of linear and nonlinear propagation [29]. Moreover, coupled maps (2) with η = 0 have been also analyzed by Letz and Kantz [41] who introduced an indicator similar to the FALE (i.e. able to quantify the growth rate of non inﬁnitesimal perturbations). This indicator turns out to be negative for inﬁnitesimal perturbations and becomes positive for ﬁnite perturbations. This means that a sufﬁciently large perturbation can propagate along the system due to nonlinear effects. This conﬁrms previous observations for marginally stable systems [6]. 7 More Realistic Models In order to test how general stable chaos is, it is natural to start by asking when dis- continuities or quasi-discontinuities can be expected to arise in the physical world. In fact, we have seen that the source of indeterminacy is the sudden ampliﬁcation of the distance between two nearby trajectories, once they fall on opposite sides of a discontinuity. In such a case, no matter how small the initial distance is, the Stable Chaos Fig. 13 Separation between two nearly equal trajectories of a point particle colliding elastically against the ﬂoor. The distance δ = sqrt(δy2 + δv2) is plotted versus time y 1 0.5 0 3 2 1 0 Δ 121 0 1 2 3 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 separation is suddenly ampliﬁed to a value of O(1), that is determined by the size of the discontinuity. Before exploring the possible occurence of such phenomena, it is important to stress that the discontinuity we are referring to is not a discontinuity in time of the type associated, e.g., to collisions. A δ-like collision induces an abrupt change of a variable (speciﬁcally, the velocity), but this affects the difference between two nearly identical trajectories only for a short (inﬁnitesinal) time lapse, after which the trajectories come close again. This is illustrated in Fig. 13, where we have plotted the time evolution of a point-like particle bouncing elastically on the ﬂoor. In the lower panel the time evolution of the Euclidean distance is represented: only within the short time window between the collisions of the two trajectories with the ﬂoor, the relative distance becomes of order O(1). This is at variance with the map lattice model (1, 2), where the distance, once ampliﬁed, remains large. In the following two subsections, we illustrate some arguments supporting the idea that a natural source of such a type of discontinuities is associated with an exchange between non-commuting δ-like events. 7.1 A Hamiltonian Model: Diatomic Hard-Point Chain Before introducing the model, it should be remarked that in Hamiltonian systems, conservation of volumes implies that the maximum Lyapunov exponent cannot be negative; at most, all Lyapunov exponents are exactly equal to zero. In fact, the Hamiltonian version of SC is the world of marginally stable and yet ergodic models and it often goes under the name of pseudochaos (see, e.g. [42]). Here, we are mostly interested in emphasizing the analogies with SC and for this reason the diatomic hard point gas (HPG) turns out to be rather appropriate also for its relationship with billiard-like models, that are often invoked in the analysis of pseudochaos. The diatomic HPG is a unidimensional system of point-like particles with masses m and M that alternate along a line and undergo elastic collisions. In the limit 122 A. Politi and A. Torcini m = M, the model is perfectly integrable, since the velocities of the two particles involved in any collision are simply interchanged. Therefore there is no mechanism leading to a diffusion in velocity space. However, as soon as the masses are assumed to be different, all numerical simulations suggest that the dynamics is ergodic. On the other hand, it is easy to convince oneself that the maximum Lyapunov exponent is still exactly equal to zero. The argument is pretty straightforward [43]: since the collision rule is linear, (cid:18) = (m − M)u + 2Mv u (cid:18) = 2mu − (m − M)v v m + M m + M (24) (25) (cid:18) both real- and tangent-space dynamics follow the same rule. As a result, the kinetic = E, where mi = m or M, depending on the parity energy conservation ( of i) translates into the conservation of a suitably weighted Euclidean norm of the i . This means that the Euclidean norm of any perturbation ﬁeld, namely, vector is conserved, irrespective of its direction, so that all Lyapunov exponents are equal to zero. i miv2 i (cid:18) i miδv2 In the absence of deterministic chaos, which is, therefore, the source of the stochastic-like behaviour exhibited by diatomic HPG chains? As illustrated in Fig. 14, we argue that the source are the discontinuities occurring around, e.g., three-body collisions. Let us consider an initial condition like that in the left panel of Fig. 14: it gives rise to a sequence of three collisions, 1 − 2, 2 − 3, 1 − 2 before the particles separate out. By shifting the position of the central particle (this is equiva- lent to moving the initial xi variable in the CML), we pass to the condition depicted in the right panel, which gives rise to the collisions 2 − 3, 1 − 2, 2 − 3. Accordingly, the sequence of two-body collisions changes abruptly in correspondence of a three- body collision, when the three particles ﬁnd themselves in the same place at the same time. As a consequence of this sudden modiﬁcation, the three ﬁnal velocities differ in the two cases, as it can be appreciated by comparing the two panels in a b p1 Fig. 14 Evolution of two nearly equal set of initial condition in a diatomic hard-point gas. By slightly shifting the position of the middle particle, the ﬁnal velocities change abruptly when passing across the three-body collision p1 p3 p3 p2 p2 Stable Chaos 123 Fig. 14. Only in the limit case of equal velocities, there is no discontinuity, since the ﬁnal set is the same for both sequences. In the former case, when starting from the sequence v1, v2, v3, one passes ﬁrst to v2, v1, v3, then to v2, v3, v1, and ﬁnally to v3, v2, v1. One can easily verify that the ﬁnal state is the same in the latter case too. The model dynamics can be further clariﬁed by exploring the analogy with bil- liard models. The connection was ﬁrst discovered in [44], where the authors con- sidered the slightly different model of hard rods. Here, we illustrate the relatively simple case of a gas of two particles P1 and P2 bounded to move between two ﬁxed barriers Bl and Br, located in x = 0 and x = 1, respectively. The linear position of the two particles can be represented as the position of a point-particle in the plane and the constraints 0 ≤ x1 ≤ x2 ≤ 1 imply that the motion is restricted to the triangular region depicted in Fig. 15. Collisions with the two mutually orthogonal edges correspond to collisions with either the left or the right barrier, while those with the diagonal correspond to interparticle collisions. Finally, the three angular points correspond to the only two possible three-body collisions, BlP1P2, P1P2Br and to the synchronous occurrence of the two-body collisions BlP1 and P2Br. In the equal mass case, there is a perfect correspondence between hard point gas and the triangular billiard. Accordingly, we can invoke the conjecture raised in [45] that billiards with rational angles (expressed in π units) are necessarily ergodic. The crucial difference that appears as soon as the two masses are assumed to differ from one another is that in the billiard-like representation, the mass itself assumes a vectorial character. In particular, incoming and outgoing velocities are not mutually symmetric in correspondence of a collsion with the diagonal. However, the most relevant consequence is the appearance of true discontinuities. This is illustrated by comparing two nearby trajectories which undergo a different sequence of collisions. In the left panel of Fig. 15, which refers to equal masses, we see that the small dif- ference in the initial velocity generates a slow linear increase of the mutual distance. In the right panel, which refers to M = 2m, the two trajectories, although starting from the same initial conditions, drastically separate out and ﬁnd themselves very far apart after as few as 5 collisions (see the arrows). Fig. 15 Billiard-like representation of the dynamics of a chain of two particles moving in an inter- val with reﬂecting boundaries. Horizontal and vertical axes correspond to the coordinates of the ﬁrst and second particle respectively. Two slightly different trajectories are plotted in each panel until the 5th collision. Left and right panels correspond to m = M, and M = 2m, respectively 124 A. Politi and A. Torcini 7.2 Neural Networks A perhaps more interesting example of a model exhibiting stable chaos is a network of leaky-integrate-and-ﬁre neurons, where exponentially long transients have been identiﬁed in various set-ups [46–48, 13]. By following [13], the model dynamics for a network of N neurons can be written as a set of N differential equations ˙vi = c − vi − (vi + w) (cid:12) (cid:11) t − t(m) j gijδ N(cid:3) (cid:3) j=1 m where the connectivity matrix gij is deﬁned as (cid:24) G/(cid:15)i 0 gij = if i and j are coupled otherwise, (26) (27) (cid:15)i is the number of neurons that are connected to the ith neurons, and G is the cou- pling strength. Here, we will limit to consider the case of inhibitory coupling, that, in these notations, corresponds to a positive G value. All variables are dimensionless and suitably rescaled: the “membrane potential” vi ∈ [ − ∞, 1] whenever reaches the limit value vj = 1, is reset to 0 and a δ-spike is thereby emitted and received by all the connected neurons. The parameter c controls the relaxation velocity, while w quantiﬁes indirectly the dependence of the effect of the spike on the instantaneous value of the membrane potential. When all connections are active, the dynamics rapidly converges towards a sta- tionary state characterized by a sequence of evenly spaced spikes (this is a so called splay state [49, 50]). In the presence of disorder, such as, e.g., a small fraction of ran- domly broken links, the evolution may signﬁcantly differ, depending on the coupling strength G. Below a certain critical value, there is still a fast convergence towards an ordered state where the neurons ﬁre in a ﬁxed order (in agreement with Jin’s theorem [51]); for sufﬁciently large coupling constants, the average (over different realizations of the disorder) transient length T is exponentially large with the number of neurons [13]. This is illustrated in Fig. 16, where we have plotted the average transient for different system sizes: squares and circles correspond to G = 0.5 and 1.8, respectively. The solid lines are the result of a linear and an exponential ﬁt, respectively. The exponential increase of the transient is a clear indication of SC, since at the same time, the maximum Lyapunov exponent (after removing the zero exponent corresponding to a shift along the trajectory) is deﬁnitely negative (as shown in [13]). Which is the source of such long transients? In between the spikes, the single potentials relax independently towards c (a value that is not reached, since c > 1). Therefore, like in the diatomic hard point gas, the evolution is piecewise linear and one can derive an analytic expression for the map as rigorously done in [13]. In the absence of jumps between different branches, the dynamics would be globally 125 Stable Chaos Fig. 16 Transient length for the neural network model (26) for c = 2, w = 4/7 and 5% of broken links. Squares (circles) correspond to G = 0.5 and (G = 1.8). The solid lines have been obtained by means of a linear and exponential ﬁt, respectively T 3 10 2 10 50 100 150 200 250 300 N stable; the negativity of the Lyapunov exponent is a reminiscence of such a stability. However, like in the previous cases, there are discontinuities associated with abrupt changes in the ﬁring order of the neurons. Let us indeed consider two neurons i and j such that gji = 0, while gij (cid:6)= 0 and consider two different initial conditions: (i) vi(0) = vj(0) − ε, (ii) vi(0) = vj(0) + ε. A schematic view of the evolution is presented in Fig. 17, where the solid line corresponds to the dynamics of the ith-neuron, while dashed and dotted line denote the former and latter trajectories, respectively. There, one can see that for times larger than t2 the two trajectories are separated by a ﬁnite distance, as a result of a discontinuity in the dynamical law. This is due to the dependence of the inhibitory effect of a spike on the actual value of v (see the multiplicative factor (u + w) in Eq. (26)). Being the size of the discontinuity of the same order of the coupling strength (O(1/N)), one might argue that this is negligible for N large enough. This is not the case, because it has to be compared with the changes induced by the smooth dynamics in between two v 1 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0 Fig. 17 Evolution of two neurons with nearly the same potential and asymmetric coupling: neuron i couples to j, but not vice versa. The dotted line corresponds to the evolution of neuron i; solid (dashed) curve corresponds to the evolution of neuron j in case its action potential is initially smaller (larger) than that of neuron j t1 t2 time 126 A. Politi and A. Torcini consecutive spikes that is of the same order. Moreover, the distance between the two trajectories is even ampliﬁed to O(1) in the time interval [t1, t2]. As t2 − t1 is, by deﬁnition of the same order of the interspike interval, this effect too is, in principle, nonnegligible. More recently, stable and yet irregular behaviour has been reported also in the context of a slightly different neural network, where the spike are assumed to be received with a ﬁnite delay τ and the spike effects are independent of v (see [47]). From the point of view of discontinuities, this latter property inhibits a persistent ampliﬁcation of distances between nearby trajectories. Nevertheless, the ﬁnite-time ampliﬁcation mechanism is still present and the very fact that long-stable transients have been observed is an indication that it lasts enough to yield “avalanches” and thereby to a self-sustained irregular behaviour. However, one should also notice that “discontinuities” are a necessary but not sufﬁcient condition for the onset of SC. 8 Conclusions In the present Review we have thoroughly discussed the phenomenon of stable chaos, a type of irregular behaviour occurring in deterministic systems that man- ifests itself as an exponentially (with the system size) long and stationary transient. SC differs from usual chaos in that it is characterized by negative Lyapunov expo- nents, but still reatins some features that are reminiscent of deterministic chaos. In fact, by smoothing out the discontinuities present in the most typical SC models, induces the multifractal spectrum of the maximum Lyapunov exponent to extend to positive values. This, in turn, suggests that topological chaos (i.e. a strictly positive topological entropy) is a prerequisite for the observation of SC. However, we have shown that linear stability analysis does not to provide a convincing description of relevant properties such as the propagation of ﬁnite perturbations. In this respect, a promising indicator is represented by the ﬁnite amplitude Lyapunov exponent, although there are conceptual difﬁculties in extending this approach beyond the maximum exponent. A further interesting question concerns the transition from ordered behaviour to SC. A detailed numerical analysis of a coupled-map lattice reveals the existence of a fuzzy region, where behaviour that is neither strictly ordered nor clearly chaotic has been detected. Is this just a difﬁculty due to strong ﬁnite size effects, or this phenomenon hides the presence of a genuinely “complex” (uncomputable) evolu- tion? In an almost globally-coupled neural network, the transition appears to be a standard point-like phenomenon, whose universality class is however still unclear. The most important question concerns the generality of SC. All models where SC has been observed do possess strong localized nonlinearities that may reduce to true discontinuities in phase space. The ﬁrst models where SC has been observed are somehow artiﬁcial systems with no direct relationship with the physical world. However, the discussion of the diatomic hard point gas and of the network of pulse coupled neurons, has contributed to clarify that discontinuities may spontaneously Stable Chaos 127 emerge in models characterized by the presence of non communting “δ-like” events (such as two-body collisions or spike emissions). Moreover, since we have seen that SC survives a smoothing of the coupled-map model, we may also conjecture that the same holds true in these latter contexts, once we assume ﬁnite collision times or ﬁnite pulse-widths.

Superpersistent chaotic transients are characterized by the following scal- ing law for its average lifetime: τ ∼ exp [C(p − pc)−χ ], where C > 0 and χ > 0 are constants, p ≥ pc is a bifurcation parameter, and pc is its critical value. As p approaches pc from above, the exponent in the exponential dependence diverges, leading to an extremely long transient lifetime. Historically the possibility of such transient raised the question of whether asymptotic attractors are relevant to turbulence. Superpersistent chaotic transients were ﬁrst discovered by Grebogi et al. in 1983. In their seminal work, unstable – unstable pair bifurcation was identiﬁed as the dynamical mechanism for the transients. In this Review this bifurcation and how it leads to superpersistent chaotic transients will be described. The occur- rence of the transients in spatially extended dynamical systems will then be exem- pliﬁed. Superpersistent chaotic transients associated with the riddling bifurcation that creates a riddled basin of attraction will be discussed, and the effect of noise on the transient lifetimes will be addressed. Finally, application to a physical problem, advection of ﬁnite-size particles in open hydrodynamical ﬂows, will be demonstrated. 1 Introduction Chaotic transients in low-dimensional dynamical systems are typically character- ized by an algebraic scaling law of its average lifetime τ with some parameter variation [1, 2]: τ ∼ (p − pc) −h, p > pc, (1) where h > 0 is the algebraic scaling exponent. There exists, however, another dis- tinct class of transient chaos – superpersistent chaotic transients that are character- ized by the following scaling law for their average lifetime [3, 4]: τ ∼ exp [C(Δp) −χ ], (2) where Δp = p − pc, p is a system parameter, C > 0 and χ > 0 are constants. As p approaches the critical value pc from above, the transient lifetime τ becomes super- persistent in the sense that the exponent in the exponential dependence diverges. This type of chaotic transients was conceived to occur through the dynamical mech- anism of unstable – unstable pair bifurcation, in which an unstable periodic orbit in a chaotic attractor collides with another unstable periodic orbit on the basin bound- ary [3, 4]. The same mechanism causes the riddling bifurcation [5] that creates a riddled basin [6], so superpersistent chaotic transients can be expected at the onset of riddling. The transients were also identiﬁed in a class of coupled-map lattices, leading to the speculation that asymptotic attractors may not be relevant for turbu- lence [7]. Noise-induced superpersistent chaotic transients were demonstrated [8] in phase synchronization [9] of weakly coupled chaotic oscillators. Signatures of noise-induced superpersistent chaotic transients were also found [10] in the advec- tive dynamics of inertial particles in open ﬂuid ﬂows [11]. Section 2 describes unstable – unstable pair bifurcation and explains why the bifurcation can lead to a superpersistent chaotic transient. Section 3 demonstrates the presence of the chaotic transient at the riddling bifurcation. The next topic is superpersistent chaotic transient in a coupled-map lattice system (Sect. 4). The phe- nomenon of noise-induced superpersistent chaotic transients is described in Sect. 5. An application to advective dynamics of inertial particles in open chaotic ﬂows is presented in Sect. 6. 2 Unstable – Unstable Pair Bifurcation Unstable – unstable pair bifurcation has been identiﬁed as the generic mechanism for superpersistent chaotic transients [3–5]. One can imagine two unstable periodic orbits of the same periods, one on the chaotic attractor and another on the basin boundary, as shown in Fig. 1a. In a noiseless situation, as the bifurcation parameter p reaches a critical value pc, the two orbits coalesce and disappear simultaneously, leaving behind a “channel” in the phase space through which trajectories on the chaotic attractor can escape, as shown in Fig. 1b. The chaotic attractor is thus con- verted into a chaotic transient, but the channel created by this mechanism is typically extremely narrow [3–5]. Suppose on average, it takes time T for a trajectory to travel through the channel in the phase space so that it is no longer on the attractor, we expect T to be inﬁnite for p = pc but, for p > pc the time becomes ﬁnite and decreases as p is increased from pc. For p above but close to pc, the tunneling time can be long. As we will argue below, we expect T to increase at least algebraically as (cid:31)p is decreased. Superpersistent Chaotic Transients 133 (a) Basin boundary (b) Unstable−unstable pair Chaotic attractor Chaotic transient Fig. 1 (a) For p < pc, a chaotic attractor, the basin boundary, and the pair of unstable periodic orbits. (b) For p > pc, escaping channel created by an unstable-unstable pair bifurcation that converts the originally attracting motion into a chaotic transient From Fig. 1a, we see that if the phase space is two dimensional, the periodic orbit on the attractor is a saddle and the one on the basin boundary is a repeller. This can arise if the map is noninvertible. Thus, the unstable-unstable pair bifurcation can occur in noninvertible maps of at least dimension two, or in invertible maps of at least dimension three (or in ﬂows of dimension of at least four). Let λ > 0 be the largest Lyapunov exponent of the chaotic attractor. After an unstable – unstable pair bifurcation the opened channel is locally transverse to the attractor. In order for a trajectory to escape, it needs to spend at least time T((cid:31)p) at the location of the opening on the attractor centered about the mediating periodic orbit involved in the bifurcation, stipulating that the trajectory must come to within distance of about exp [ − λT((cid:31)p)] from this orbit. The probability for this to occur is proportional to exp [ − λT((cid:31)p)]. The average time for the trajectory to remain on the attractor, or the average transient lifetime, is thus τ ∼ exp [λT((cid:31)p)]. (3) We see that the dependence of T((cid:31)p) on (cid:31)p, which is the average time that tra- jectories spend in the escaping channel, or the tunneling time, is the key quantity determining the scaling of the average chaotic transient lifetime τ . To obtain the scaling dependence of the tunneling time T((cid:31)p) on (cid:31)p, we note that, since the escaping channel is extremely narrow, for typical situations where λ > 0 and T((cid:31)p) large, the dynamics in the channel is approximately one dimen- sional along which the periodic orbit on the attractor is stable but the orbit on the basin boundary is unstable for p < pc (Fig. 1a). This feature can thus be captured through the following simple one-dimensional map: xn+1 = x2 n + xn + p, (4) where x denotes the dynamical variable in the channel and p is a normalized bifur- cation parameter with critical point pc = 0 (we thus write T(p)). For p < pc = 0, the map has a stable ﬁxed point xs = − −p. −p and an unstable ﬁxed point xu = √ √ 134 Y.C. Lai These two collide at pc and disappear for p > pc, mimicking an unstable-unstable pair bifurcation. Since T(p) is large, map (4) can be approximated in continuous-time as dx dt ≈ x2 + p. (5) Suppose the root of the channel is at x = 0 and its length is l. The tunneling time is given by T(p) ≈ (cid:17) l 0 dx x2 + p ∼ p −1/2. Substituting Eq. (6) into Eq. (3), we obtain τ (p) ∼ exp (C0p −1/2), (6) (7) where C0 > 0 is a constant. We see that as p approaches the critical value pc = 0 from above, the average transient lifetime diverges in an exponential-algebraic way, giving rise to a superpersistent chaotic transient. To give a concrete example, we use the class of two-dimensional maps con- structed by Grebogi et al. [3, 4]: θn+1 = 2θn mod 2π , zn+1 = azn + z2 n + β cos θn, (8) where a and β are parameters. Because of the Z2 n term in the z-equation, for large zn we have |zn+1| > |zn|. There is thus an attractor at z = +∞. Near z = 0, depending on the choice of the parameters, there can be either a chaotic attractor or none. For instance, for 0 < β (cid:21) 1, there is a chaotic attractor near z = 0 for a < ac = 1 − 2 β and the attractor becomes a chaotic transient for a > ac [3]. The chaotic attractor, its basin of attraction, and part of the basin of the inﬁnity attractor are shown in Fig. 2. √ (cid:25) Following the same argument leading to the scaling law (7), one can see that the map system (8) allows for superpersistent for a > ac. In particular, for a < ac there are two ﬁxed points: (θ1,z1) = (0,zb) and (θ2,z2) = (0,zc), where zc,b = (1 − a ± r)/2 and r = (1 − a)2 − 4β. The ﬁxed points (0,zb) and (0,zc) are on the basin boundary and on the chaotic attractor, respectively. They coalesce at a = ac. For a > ac, a channel is created through which trajectories on the original attractor can escape to the attractor at inﬁnity. At the location of the channel where θ = 0, the z-mapping can be written as zn+1 − zn = (a − 1)zn + z2 n + β. Superpersistent Chaotic Transients

π For the two-dimensional map model (8), a chaotic attractor near z = 0, its basin of attrac- tion (blank), and the basin of the attraction of the attractor at z = + ∞ (black). From [3] with permission Letting δ = z − z∗, where z∗ is the minimum of the quadratic function of z on the right-hand side, we have δn+1 = δn + δ2 n + b, (9) √ √ β(a − ac). In β(a − ac) + [(a − ac)/2]2. For a > ac, we have b ≈ where b ≡ the continuous-time approximation, the dynamics in δ can be described by dδ/dt = δ2 + b. Thus the time T required to tunnel through the escaping channel is (cid:17) ∞ T ≈ 1 b1/2 0 dδ δ2 + 1 = π 2b1/2 . Since the θ -dynamics is uniformally chaotic with Lyapunov exponent λ = ln 2 > 0, the probability for a trajectory to fall in the opening of the channel and to stay near there in the θ -direction for consecutively T iterations is proportional to e−T ln 2. For a > ac, the average chaotic transient time is thus given by τ ∼ eT ln 2 ≈ e(π ln 2/2)b−1/2 ≈ exp [C(a − ac) −1/2], (10) where C = π ( ln 2)β−1/4/2 is a positive constant. Thus for a > ac the algebraic exponent in the scaling of the tunneling time with the parameter variation assumes the value of 1/2, as shown in Fig. 3. 136 Fig. 3 For the two-dimensional map model (8), an example of the numerically obtained scaling law for superpersistent chaotic transient. From [3] with permission Y.C. Lai 3 Riddling Bifurcation and Superpersistent Chaotic Transients The presence of symmetry in a dynamical system often leads to an invariant sub- space where, in the absence of symmetry-breaking or random perturbations, a tra- jectory originated in the invariant subspace remains there forever. Situations can also arise where a chaotic attractor lies in the invariant subspace. One common example is the system of coupled, identical chaotic oscillators. The synchronization manifold is naturally a low-dimensional invariant subspace in the full phase space. If another attractor exists outside the invariant subspace, riddling can occur in the sense that the basin of the chaotic attractor in the invariant subspace is riddled with holes of all sizes that belong to the basin of the other attractor. Imagine the situation where all unstable perioic orbits embedded in the chaotic attractor are stable with respect to perturbations in the direction transverse to the invaraint subspace. In this case, almost all initial conditions in the vicinity of the invariant subspace lead to trajec- tories that end up asymptotically on the chaotic attractor. Riddling bifurcation [5] refers to the situation where, when a system parameter changes, an unstable periodic orbit (usually of low period) [12] embedded in the chaotic attractor, becomes trans- versely unstable. As pointed out in Ref. [5], an immediate physical consequence of the riddling bifurcation is that, when there is a small amount of symmetry-breaking, an extraordinarily low fraction of the trajectories in the invariant subspace diverge. This means that a typical trajectory would spend an extremely long time in the vicin- ity of the chaotic attractor before approaching the other coexisting attractor. The average lifetime of the chaotic transient versus the amount of symmetry-breaking was shown [5] to obey the scaling law for superpersistent chaotic transients. In a two-dimensional phase space, the invariant subspace is a line. In this case, the onset of riddling is determined by a saddle-repeller bifurcation (eigenvalue +1) [3, 4]. A chaotic attractor in the invariant line is typically one-dimensional. Let xp be Superpersistent Chaotic Transients 137 Fig. 4 (a) Unstable saddle ﬁxed point in the invariant subspace and two repellers off the invariant subspace for p < pc (before the saddle-repeller pitchfork bifurcation). (b) Tongue structure formed for p > pc, after the onset of riddling. Trajectories originated from initial conditions inside the tongues escape the invariant subspace an unstable ﬁxed point embedded in the chaotic attractor in the invariant subspace. The unstable point is stable transversely to this subspace, as shown in Fig. 4a. Rid- dling occurs when xp loses its transverse stability as a parameter p passes through a critical value pc. The loss of transverse stability is induced by the collision at p = pc of two repellers r+ and r−, located symmetrically with respect to the invari- ant subspace, with the saddle at xp (a saddle-repeller pitchfork bifurcation). These two repellers exist only for p ≤ pc, as shown in Fig. 4a. For p > pc, the saddle xp becomes a repeller, and the two original repellers r+ and r− off the invariant subspace no longer exist. Due to nonlinearity, a “tongue” opens at xp, allowing trajectories near the invari- ant subspace to escape for p > pc, as shown in Fig. 4b. Each preimage of xp also developes a tongue simultaneously. Since the preimages of xp are dense in the invari- ant subspace, an inﬁnite number of tongues open simultaneously at p = pc, indi- cating that initial conditions arbitrarily close to the invariant subspace can approach another attractor. Trajectories in the chaotic attractor, however, remain there even for p > pc, since the subspace in which the chaotic attractor lies is invariant and each tongue has a zero width there. But trajectories near the chaotic attractor have a ﬁnite probability of being in the open and dense set of tongues. The basin of attraction for the chaotic attractor is then a Cantor-set of leaves of positive Lebesgue measure, 138 Y.C. Lai signifying riddling. Physically, since the onset of riddling induces the supernarrow tongues near the invariant subspace, superpersistent chaotic transient arises [3, 4]. To give an example, consider the following general class of dynamical systems [5]: xn+1 = f(xn), yn+1 = σ + pg(xn)yn + high order odd terms of yn, (11) where x ∈ RN (N ≥ 1), y ∈ RM (M ≥ 1), f(xn) is a map with a chaotic attractor in the invariant subspace yn = 0, g(xn) = 1 at some unstable periodic orbit of f(xn), p is a system parameter, and pg(xn) is assumed to be positive. We call σ ≥ 0 the symmetry-breaking parameter. Notice that for initial y0 ≥ 0 and σ ≥ 0, trajectories have yn ≥ 0 for all times. The following two-dimensional version of Eq. (11) can be analyzed [5]: xn+1 = axn(1 − xn), yn+1 = σ + pe −b(x−xp)2 yn + y3 n, (12) where, for σ = 0, y = 0 deﬁnes the invariant subspace as a trajectory with y = 0 will remain so forever, and a,b > 0 are parameters. The symmetry-breaking parameter is with respect to the symmetry y → −y. Thus, the dynamics in the invariant subspace is described by the logistic map xn+1 = axn(1 − xn) for which chaotic attractors occur for parameter values in a positive Lebesgue measure set [13]. An analysis similar to these in Sect. 2 leads to the following scaling law for the average transient lifetime with respect to the symmetry-breaking parameter σ : τ ∼ exp [Kσ −2/3], (13) where K is a positive constant proportional to the Lyapunov exponent of the chaotic τ ver- logistic map. An example of the scaling is shown Fig. 5, a plot of log10 sus σ −2/3. Note that the exponent 2/3 is a consequence of the y3 term in the y−dynamics. If the y3 term is replaced by, say, a y2 term, then the exponent would be 1/2. Thus, the exponent 2/3 is speciﬁc to the two-dimensional map model Eq. (12). The escaping behavior of trajectories, once they have fallen into the tongue, can be seen by monitoring their traces in the phase space before they reach y = 1. Since the tongues are supernarrow at p = pc, it is numerically convenient to examine the case where p > pc. Figure 6 shows the last 50 points for 600 trajectories before they reach y = 1, where p = 1.18 and σ = 0.005. It can be seen there is a “mushroom- shape” (tongue) crowd of trajectory points in the phase space located above the ﬁxed point xp. The thick solid curves in Fig. 6 represent the envelope of the tongue. These curves can be derived analytically by considering the escaping dynamics in the vicinity of xp. Speciﬁcally, after a trajectory falls into the escaping channel located at xp, its dynamics can be approximated by: (1) (xn+1 − xp) ≈ (2 − a)(xn − xp); Superpersistent Chaotic Transients 139 Fig. 5 Average transient time τ versus the symmetry-breaking parameter σ for 0.01 ≤ σ ≤ 0.04 at p = pc = 1. The parameters are a = 3.8 and b = 5.0 in τ Eq. (12). The plot is log10 versus σ −2/3. From [5] with permission Fig. 6 Mushroom-shaped phase-space regions (tongues) through which trajectories escape the y = 0 chaotic attractor for p = 1.18 and σ = 0.005. From [5] with permission and (2) yn+1 ≈ σ + pyn + y3. Let zn ≡ |xn − xp|, the x−dynamics becomes: zn+1 = |2 − a|zn = (a − 2)zn. For p close to pc and σ small, the z− and y− dynamics can be approximated by dz/dt = ρz, dy/dt = σ + (p − 1)y + y3, (14) 140 Y.C. Lai where ρ = a − 3. The following formula for the edge of the tongue for σ = 0 and p > 1 can then be obtained: (cid:26) z = (cid:25) y (p − 1) + y2 (cid:27)ρ/(p−1) , for p > pc = 1. (15) The solid curves in Fig. 6 are (xp ± z), respectively. In principle, additional terms such as cxy (c is constant) in the dy/dt equation should be considered, but this has negligible effect on the results [5]. In more general cases where the system does not have a skew-product structure, one should also consider terms in the x−equation such as σ y, σ y2 or even higher-order terms in y. But for y small (near the invariant subspace) one has σ y (cid:21) y. Thus, these terms have negligible effect on the properties of the escaping tongues. 4 Superpersistent Chaotic Transients in Spatiotemporal Systems An approach to studying spatially extended dynamical system is to examine vari- ous spatial patterns and their dynamical evolution. In a turbulent state, the pattern evolution appears random but statistical quantities usually converge for all practical time scales [14]. Situations can occur where, after a long time, the system falls onto a low-dimensional attractor. In this case, the high-dimensional, turbulent behavior may be only a transient. It is not possible to determine whether the observed “turbu- lence” is transient unless the asymototic time regime is reached. If the transient time is much longer than any physically realizable time, the system is effectively turbu- lent, regardless of the nature of the asymptotic attractor. In this sense, attractors are not relevant to turbulence. Crutchﬁeld and Kaneko [7] recognized the possibility of extremely long transient in spatiotemporal dynamical systems. They demonstrated, by using a prototype model, that the attractor can typically be low-dimensional but the transient dynamics can be high-dimensional and complicated. As the system size N is increased, the transient time can grow exponentially or even faster, as follows: τN ∼ exp (CN α ), (16) where C > 0 and α ≥ 1. We see that the transient is superpersistent in the limit N → ∞. The case of α ≤ 1 where the growth of the transient time is exponen- tial or slower with N was referred to as type-I transient turbulence, while the case α > 1 as type-II transient turbulence [7]. One example of Type-I transient turbu- lence is chaotic defect motion in coupled map lattices where the relaxation time for disappearance of the complex patterns increases at most exponentially with the system size. For type-II transient turbulence, the pattern evolution typically appears turbulent and high-dimensional. To demonstrate superpersistent chaotic transients in spatially extended dynam- ical systems, Crutchﬁeld and Kaneko [7] used the following coupled-map-lattice Superpersistent Chaotic Transients 141 model in which both time and space are discrete but the dynamical variables are continuous: xi n+1 = 1 2r + 1 (cid:6) (cid:5) xi+j n f r(cid:3) j=−r , i = 0, . . . ,N − 1, (17) where n and i are discrete time and space, respectively, f (x) is a nonlinear map governing the local dynamics, and r is a parameter deﬁning the range of spatial coupling. For nearest-neighbor coupling, r = 1. Crutchﬁeld and Kaneko chose the following piecewise linear map, the “dripping handrail” model, for f (x): f (x) = sx + ω (mod1), (18) where s and ω are parameters. The local dynamics thus consists of an increase of ω with each iteration but when the dynamical variable x exceeds a threshold xdrop = (1 − ω)/s, a sudden decrease from unity occurs. Physically, the coupled map lattice system Eq. (17) represents a simpliﬁed model of a dripping ﬂuid layer, where the local map f (x) models the dynamics of an isolated drop. The map f (x) can actually generate complicated dynamics such as chaos and it was also used to study the dynamics of the stirred Belousov – Zhabotinsky chemical reaction [15]. Crutchﬁeld and Kaneko suggested that both type-I and type-II transient turbu- lence are due to the complex, hierarchical phase space structure and the transient relaxation can be regarded as a sequence of transitions through a hierarchy of subbasins. These subbasins are subspaces of a basin separated by walls through which a trajectory cannot pass except at portals. In particular, for type-I transient turbulence, the phase space is organized as a hierarchy of subbasins of decreasing dimension. Patterns near the attractor move in relatively low-dimensional subbasins, while those far away from the attractor in high-dimensional subbasins. The collision and annihilation of two defects correspond to an orbit moving from one subbasin to another. Some constant spatial length L can then be deﬁned for the portal, which is determined by the defect size and the local geometry of the annihilation process. The phase-space volume of the portal is thus V ∼ cL, where c < 1 is the relative size of the portal with respect to the size of the subbasin. Since the number of defects in a random initial pattern is proportional to N, the probability for the sequence of transitions down through the hierarchy is PN ∼ cNL. Assuming the dynamics within each subbasin is ergodic, the average transient lifetime is −1 τN ∼ P N ∼ c −NL ≡ (¯c)NL, (19) where ¯c = 1/c > 1. For type-II transient turbulence, numerical evidence suggests that the patterns are generally complex during the transient epoch but occasionally they can be quite uniform. This implies that the underlying subbasins may consist of long tenrils passing through the neighborhood of the ﬁnal attractor that corresponds to a simple, uniform pattern. That is, a trajectory can be relatively close to the attrac- tor at some time but most times it moves away from it in order to ﬁnd the correct path to actually reach the attractor. The subbasin hierarchy can be approximated by a direct product of the local basin structure at each spatial site. The number 142 Y.C. Lai of subbasins is proportional to Nγ , where γ measures the density of the tendrils. Since there are no localized annihilation events, passage through a portal is spatially global. The probability p of passing a portal is thus p ∼ cN. The total probability of passing all portals to reach the ﬁnal attractor is the product of Nγ such local probabilities. The average transient time is τN ∼ c −N1+γ ≡ (¯c)N1+γ , (20) which increases faster than exponentially with system size. (cid:8) Fig. 7 For the coupled-map lattice system Eqs. (17) and (18), a typical space-time diagram with site amplitude (cid:7) xi plotted from black to n white for a 128-site, spatially periodic lattice. From [7] with permission Fig. 8 Example of hyperexponential scaling of the average transient lifetime for the coupled-map lattice system Eqs. (17) and (18). From [7] with permission Superpersistent Chaotic Transients 143 A typical evolution of the lattice from a random initial condition is shown in Fig. 7, which is somewhat irregular but it eventually settles down to a uniform pattern. The scaling of the average transient lifetime in the coupled-map lattice system Eqs. (17) and (18) is hyperexponential, as shown in Fig. 8, where log τN versus (N − 1)3 is plotted (together with a linear ﬁtting) for N = 1, . . . ,47. The hyperexponential growth in the transient lifetime means that transient spatial chaos is in principle unsimulatable on ﬁnite-state machines for lattices of large size. For turbulence this means that the ﬁnal attractor may never be observed and thus irrela- vant for practical purposes. 5 Noise-Induced Superpersistent Chaotic Transients In the general setting where an unstable-unstable pair bifurcation occurs, noise can induce superpersistent chaotic transients preceding the bifurcation. Consider, in the noiseless case, a chaotic attractor and its basin of attraction. When noise is present, there can be a nonzero probability that two periodic orbits, one belonging to the attractor and another to the basin boundary, get close and coalesce tempo- rally, giving rise to a nonzero probability that a trajectory on the chaotic attractor crosses the basin boundary and moves to the basin of another attractor. Transient chaos thus arises. Due to noise, the channels through which trajectory escapes the chaotic attractor open and close intermittently in time. The probability of escape is extremely small because escaping through the channel requires staying of the trajectory in a small vicinity of the opening of the channel consecutively for a ﬁnite amount of time, which is an event with extremely small probability. In this sense, the channel must be “super” narrow [3–5], leading to a superpersistent chaotic transient. The creation of the channel by noise and the noisy dynamics in the channel are thus the key to understanding the noise-induced transient behavior. There are two regimes of interest. In the subcritical case, there is a chaotic attrac- tor and no escaping channel exists in the absence of noise. In this case, the channel is induced by noise and it opens and closes randomly in time. In the supercritical case, the channel is open and there is already a superpersistent chaotic transient. The pres- ence of noise affects the deterministic dynamics in the channel. In both cases, the dynamics in the channel can be regarded as being driven by a stochastic force and, hence, it can be modeled by a stochastic differential equation, the solution to which gives the tunneling time through the channel. Apparently, this time depends on the noise amplitude. The dependence, in combination with the small probability for a trajectory to move to the opening of the channel and to stay there for the duration of the tunneling time, gives the scaling of the average lifetime of the superpersistent chaotic transients with the noise amplitude. Let ε be the noise amplitude. To obtain the scaling dependence of the tunneling time T(ε) on ε, we use the following one-dimensional map: xn+1 = xk−1 n + xn + p + εξ (n), (21) 144 Y.C. Lai where k ≥ 3 is an odd integer so as to generate a pair of ﬁxed points with different unstable dimension, pc = 0, and ξ (n) is a Gaussian random process of zero mean and unit variance. If the tunneling time is T (cid:22) 1, Eq. (21) can be approximated by dx dt = xk−1 + p + εξ (t), (22) For p < 0, the deterministic system for Eq. (22) has a stable ﬁxed point xs = −|p|1/(k−1) and an unstable ﬁxed point xu = |p|1/(k−1), but there are no more ﬁxed points for p > 0, as shown in Fig. 9. Let xr = xs for p < 0 and xr = 0 for p ≥ 0, and let T k p be the tunneling time. A properly formulated ﬁrst-passage-time problem for this one-dimensional stochastic process yields the scaling of T k p with the noise amplitude ε [16, 17]. Let P(x,t) be a probability density function of the stochastic process governed by Eq. (22), which satisﬁes the Fokker – Planck equation [18, 19]: ∂P(x,t) ∂t = − ∂ ∂x [(xk−1 + p)P(x,t)] + ε2 2 ∂ 2P ∂x2 . (23) Let l be the effective length of the channel in the sense that a trajectory with x > l is considered to have escaped the channel. The time required for a trajectory to travel through the channel is equivalent to the mean ﬁrst passage time T from xr to l. Focusing on a trajectory that escapes eventually, we assume that, once it falls into the channel through xr, it will eventually exit the channel at x = l without returning (a) (b) xu xs Fig. 9 For the prototype model Eq.+ (21), (a) the stable and unstable ﬁxed points for the subcritical cases (p < 0), and (b) the supercritical case (p > 0). From [17] with permission H(x) H(x) Superpersistent Chaotic Transients 145 to the original chaotic attractor. This is reasonable considering that the probability for a trajectory to fall in the channel and then to escape is already exponentially small and, hence, the probability for any “second-order” process to occur, where a trajectory falls in the channel, moves back to the original attractor, and falls back in the channel again, is negligible. For trajectories in the channel there is thus a reﬂecting boundary condition at x = 0: (cid:14) P(x,t) − (cid:15) ∂P ∂x |x=xr = 0. (24) That trajectories exit the channel at x = l indicates an absorbing boundary condition at x = l: P(l,t) = 0. (25) Assuming that trajectories initially are near the opening of the channel (but in the channel), we have the initial condition P(x,xr) = δ (cid:6) (cid:5) + x − x r . (26) Under these boundary and initial conditions, the solution to the Fokker – Planck equation yields the following mean ﬁrst-passage-time [18, 19] for the stochastic process (22): p(ε) = 2 T k ε2 (cid:17) l xr dy exp [ − bH(y)] (cid:17) y xr (cid:18) exp [bH(y (cid:18) )]dy (27) where H(x) = (xk + kpx) and b = 2/(kε2). The double integral in Eq. (22) can be carried out [16, 17] for the three distinct cases: critical (p = 0), supercritical (p > 0), and subcritical (p < 0). The results can be summarized as follows. • For the small noise regime (ε (cid:21) εc ∼ |p|k/(2(k−1))), ⎧ ⎪⎨ T k p(ε) ∼ ⎪⎩ p−(k−2)/(k−1), ε−(2−4/k), |p|−(k−2)/(k−1) exp (cid:11) |p|k/(k−1) ε2 • For the large noise regime (ε (cid:22) εc), p(ε) ∼ ε−(2−4/k). T k p > 0, p = 0, , p < 0. (cid:12) (28) (29) 146 Y.C. Lai These laws imply the following scaling laws for the average lifetime of the chaotic transients in various regimes: • For the small noise regime (ε (cid:21) εc ∼ |p|k/(2(k−1))), ⎧ ⎨ ⎩ τ k p (ε) ∼ exp [p−(k−2)/(k−1)], exp [ε−(2−4/k)], exp (cid:5) |p|−(k−2)/(k−1) exp [|p|k/(k−1)/ε2] p > 0, p = 0, (cid:6) , p < 0. • For the large noise regime (ε (cid:22) εc), we have p (ε) ∼ exp (ε−(2−4/k)). τ k (30) (31) The general observation is that for large noise (ε (cid:22) εc), the transient is normally superpersistent. For small noise, three behaviors arise depending on the bifurcation parameter p: constant (independent of noise) for the supercritical regime, normally superpersistent for the critical case, and extraordinarily superpersistent for the sub- critical regime in the sense of scaling in (30) (for p < 0). Numerical support for these distinct scaling behaviors can be found in [16, 17]. 6 Application: Advection of Inertial Particles in Open Chaotic Flows The phenomenon of superpersistent chaotic transients ﬁnds application in ﬂuid dynamics. It has been known that ideal particles of zero mass and size follow the velocity of the ﬂow and, as such, the advective dynamics can be described as Hamil- tonian [20, 21] in the physical space for which chaos can arise but not attractors. In an open Hamiltonian ﬂow, ideal particles coming from the upper stream must necessarily go out of the region of interest in ﬁnite time. However, the inertia of the advective particles can alter the ﬂow locally [22]. As a result, the underlying dynam- ical system becomes dissipative for which attractors can arise and, hence, particles can be trapped permanently in some region in the physical space [23, 24]. This phenomenon was demonstrated in a model of two-dimensional ﬂow past a cylin- drical obstacle [11]. This result has implications in environmental science where forecasting aerosol and pollutant transport is a basic task, or even in defense where the spill of a toxin or biological pathogen in large-scale ﬂows is of critical concern. The possibility that toxin particles can be trapped in physical space is particularly worrisome. It is thus interesting to study the structural stability of such attractors [10]. In particular, can chaotic attractors so formed be persistent under small noise? It was found [10] that in general, the attractor is destroyed by small noise and replaced by a chaotic transient, which is typically superpersistent. For small noise, the extraordinarily long trapping time makes the transient particle motion practi- cally equivalent to an attracting motion with similar physical or biological effects. Superpersistent Chaotic Transients 147 This ﬁnding suggests a way to directly observe superpersistent chaotic transients in laboratory experiments. For an ideal, passive particle of zero inertia and zero size advected in a ﬂow, the particle velocity v is the ﬂow velocity u which, in a two-dimensional physical space, is determined by a stream function Ψ (x,y,t): ux = ∂Ψ/∂y and uy = −∂Ψ/∂x. For particles of ﬁnite size, viscous friction arises and, as such, their velocities differ from those of the ﬂuid. Consider a spherical particle of radius a and mass mp, and ﬂuid of dynamic viscosity μ and element mass mf , the equation of motion of the advective particle is [22] mp dv dt = mf du dt − (mf /2) (cid:13) (cid:16) dv dt − du dt − 6π aμ(v − u), (32) where on the right-hand side, the ﬁrst term is the ﬂuid force from the undisturbed ﬂow ﬁeld, the second term is the force due to the added mass effect, and the third represents the Stokes drag. While in principle, the ﬂuid velocity u is disturbed by the particle motion, if the particle sizes are relatively small and their concentration is low, u can be considered as unchanged [11]. For convenience, one can introduce the mass ratio parameter and the inertial parameter R = 2ρf ρf + 2ρp A = R 9 (a/L)2Re 2 , where ρp and ρf are the densities of the particle and of the ﬂuid, respectively, L is a typical large-scale mixing length, and Re is the Reynolds number. The equation of motion can then be casted into a dimensionless form. To simulate random forcing due to ﬂow disturbance or other environmental factors, we add terms εξx(t) and εξy(t) to the force components in the x- and y-directions, where ξx(t) and ξy(t) are independent Gaussian random variables of zero mean and unit variance, and ε is the noise amplitude. The ﬁnal equation of motion under random perturbations is dv dt − 3R 2 du dt = −A(v − u) + εξ (t), (33) where ξ (t) = [ξx(t),ξy(t)]T . Inertial particles are aerosols if 0 < R < 2/3 and they are bubbles if 2/3 < R < 2. The limit A → ∞ corresponds to the situation of ideal particles (passive advection). A convenient numerical framework to study the advective dynamics of inertial particles [11] is the open ﬂow model of the von Kármán vortex street in the wake of a cylinder of radius r, located at (x,y) = (0,0). A time-periodic stream function 148 Y.C. Lai Ψ (x,y,t) (period Tf = 1 in a standard dimensionless form) governing the motions of vortices in the background ﬂow of velocity u0 can be constructed explicitly from the solutions of the two-dimensional viscous Navier-Stokes equations for the geometry of a circle of radius r in the middle of an inﬁnite channel of width w = 4r [25]. The Reynolds number is Re ≈ 250. The ﬂow velocity u(x,y,t) can be obtained from Ψ (x,y,t), allowing the particle motions to be computed. In Ref. [11], it was shown that attractors can be formed in the bubble regime. It is thus convenient to focus on this regime, e.g., by ﬁxing R = 1.47 and A = 30. There are three attractors [11]: two chaotic and one at x = ∞. The chaotic attractors are located near the cylinder (but not stuck on it): one in y > 0 and another in y < 0. To gain insight into what might happen to the attractors under noise, the basins of attraction of these attractors can be examined [10]. Figure 10 shows the basins of attraction of the two chaotic attractors (light blue and yellow, respectively), where the blank region denotes the basin of the attractor at inﬁnity. Note that the phase space is ﬁve-dimensional, so what is shown in Fig. 10 is in fact a two-dimensional slice of the basin structure in the full phase space, which corresponds to the phys- ical space. Near the cylinder, the basin boundaries among the three attractors are apparently fractal.1 Because of the explicit time dependence in the stream function and therefore in the ﬂow velocities, the attractors and their basins move oscillato- rily around the cylinder. The remarkable feature is that in the physical space, there are time intervals during which the attractors come close to the basin boundaries. Thus, under noise, we expect permanently trapped motion on any one of the two chaotic attractors to become impossible. In particular, particles can be trapped near 1 0 y −1 −2 −1 0 x 1 Fig. 10 Basins of attraction of two chaotic attractors (light blue and yellow, respectively) in the absence of noise. The blank region denotes the basin of the attractor at x = ∞. From [10] with permission 1 Note that Fig. 10 represents a plot of initial conditions. For both Hamiltonian and inertial parti- cles, those with long lifetime are close to the stable foliations of the nonattracting chaotic set. It is known that, for a general Hamiltonian system, under weak dissipation, the stable foliations are converted into the basin boundaries between the coexisting attractors [26], which are fractals. Superpersistent Chaotic Transients 149 the cylinder, switching intermittently between the two originally chaotic attractors, but this can last only for a ﬁnite amount of time: eventually all trajectories on these attractors escape and approach the x = ∞ attractor. That is, chaos becomes transient under noise. To understand the nature of the noise-induced transient chaos, one can distribute a large number of particles in the original basins of the chaotic attractors and exam- ine the channel(s) through which they escape to the x = ∞ attractor under noise [10]. Figure 11a, b, c show, for three instants of time (t, t+Tf /4, and t+Tf /2, respec- tively), locations of an ensemble of particles in the physical space. Due to the sym- metry of the ﬂow [25], the particle trajectories at t and t+Tf /2 are symmetric to each other with respect to the x-axis, as can be seen from Fig. 11a, c. While there are par- ticles still trapped in the original attractors, many others are already away from the cylinder. Since this is a two-dimensional projection of a ﬁve-dimensional dynamics, some fractal-like features overlap. The channels through which they escape are a set of thin openings surrounding the cylinder and extending to one of the vortices in the 2 (a) y 0 −2 −2 2 (b) y 0 −2 −2 2 (c) y 0 −2 −2 0 0 0 2 x 2 x 2 x 4 6 4 6 4 6 Fig. 11 (a–c) At three different instants of time, Tf /4 apart, locations of the temporally trapped and escaping particles in the physical space. From [10] with permission Y.C. Lai 150 Fig. 12 Scaling of the average lifetime of the trapped chaotic particles versus the noise amplitude. From [10] with permission 2 1 ] ) τ ( n l [ n l 0 −2 −1 0 ln(1/ε) 1 2 ﬂow. After wandering near the vortex, particles go to the x = ∞ attractor. Because of the time-dependent nature of the ﬂow, in the physical space the locations of these openings vary in time, but the feature that they are narrow is common. For a ﬁxed noise amplitude, numerically it was found that the lifetimes of the particles near the cylinder obey an extremely slow, exponentially decaying distribution, from which the average lifetime τ is obtained. Figure 12 shows τ versus the noise amplitude ε on a proper scale. A least-squares ﬁt gives τ ≈ exp [3.3ε−0.55]. Note that for ε = 0, there is an attracting motion so that τ diverges. Figure 12 suggests, however, the way that τ diverges follows the superpersistent transient scaling law as ε is decreased. Theoretically, the observed noise-induced superpersistent chaotic transient and the scaling behavior in Fig. 12 can be explained by using the approach in Sect. 5. Since the phase space in a two-dimensional ﬂuid problem is exactly the conﬁg- uration (or physical) space, the result exempliﬁed by Fig. 12 implies that it may be possible to observe superpersistent chaotic transients in physical space. It was suggested [10] that the ﬂow system used for experimental study of chaotic scattering [27] could be used for this purpose. 7 Conclusions In conclusion, an unstable – unstable pair bifurcation can generate a narrow channel through which trajectories originally on a chaotic attractor can escape, converting attracting motion into a transient. The average transient lifetime depends exponen- tially on the time required for a trajectory to pass the channel, which in turn depends on quantities such as the parameter difference, symmetry-breaking parameter, and noise amplitude etc., typically algebraically. As a result, a superpersistent chaotic transient arises. The transients can accompany phenomenon such as the onset of riddled basins and the stability of attractors formed by inertial particles advected Superpersistent Chaotic Transients 151 in hydrodynamical ﬂuid ﬂows. Such transients are also expected to be common in spatially extended dynamical systems. Synchronization is now well established as representing coherent behaviour between two or more otherwise autonomous nonlinear systems subject to some degree of coupling. Such behaviour has mainly been studied to date, however, in relatively low-dimensional discrete systems or networks. But the possibility of similar kinds of behaviour in continuous or extended spatiotemporal systems has many potential practical implications, especially in various areas of geophysics. We review here a range of cyclically varying phenomena within the Earth’s cli- mate system for which there may be some evidence or indication of the possibil- ity of synchronized behaviour, albeit perhaps imperfect or highly intermittent. The exploitation of this approach is still at a relatively early stage within climate science and dynamics, in which the climate system is regarded as a hierarchy of many cou- pled sub-systems with complex nonlinear feedbacks and forcings. The possibility of synchronization between climate oscillations (global or local) and a predictable external forcing raises important questions of how models of such phenomena can be validated and veriﬁed, since the resulting response may be relatively insensitive to the details of the model being synchronized. The use of laboratory analogues may therefore have an important role to play in the study of natural systems that can only be observed and for which controlled experiments are impossible. We go on to demonstrate that synchronization can be observed in the laboratory, even in weakly coupled ﬂuid dynamical systems that may serve as direct analogues of the behaviour of major components of the Earth’s climate system. The potential implications and observability of these effects in the long-term climate variability of the Earth is further discussed.

In recent years, the study of synchronization phenomena in nonlinear systems has made a number of signiﬁcant advances in various areas of physics, engineering and the life sciences [1]. The ﬁrst documented example of synchronization was reported as long ago as 1665 by Christiaan Huygens, who noted the tendency of a pair of pendulum clocks, mounted on a common support, eventually to synchronize the phase of their oscillations, even if they would adopt slightly different swing periods if isolated from each other. The two pendula were “coupled” by the common support which was moving in a way which was hardly perceptible to Huygen’s eyes but strong enough for the pendula to “feel” each other, i.e. the two pendula were effec- tively interacting through small vibrations in the support. Later on, it was concluded that these small vibrations produced the synchronization of the two pendula. Synchronization is a phenomenon that nowadays is usually treated as a regime in which two, or more, coupled periodic or even chaotic systems exhibit correlated, and sometimes even identical, oscillations. A key feature is that at least one of the systems is sufﬁciently nonlinear that external perturbations can affect its natural oscillation frequency and hence its phase. The applied coupling is therefore able to systematically modify the behaviour of the perturbed system to result in a regime in which its phase of oscillation is locked into a coherent relationship with that of the perturbing system (and vice versa in the case of two-way coupling). Since the ﬁrst investigations of synchronization phenomena, several different types of synchronization have been identiﬁed and studied. These include situa- tions where the locking of both the phase and amplitude of the systems may be less than perfect. Such partially synchronized states include phase synchronization, lag synchronization, complete synchronization, intermittent and imperfect (phase) synchronization, and so-called generalized synchronization [1, 3]. It has been sug- gested that all these different synchronization states are in fact related to each other and are different manifestations of the same universal phenomenon. However, the relationship between them is still not well understood or clariﬁed [4]. In this paper we examine aspects of the climate of the Earth to which ideas related to synchronization might apply. Much effort is put into trying to understand the complexities of the climate system and its dynamical evolution by the scientiﬁc community, and to develop models for predicting its behaviour and response to various perturbations, both natural and anthropogenic. The possible tendency for certain sub-systems within such a complex dynamical network to develop even par- tially synchronized behaviour could have major implications for its future evolution. So it is of increasing importance for nonlinear dynamical theory to play a full role in advancing our understanding of the impact of both transient and continuous per- turbations on systems as complex as the climate. Section 2 therefore reviews some aspects of climate variability that can be viewed as representing quasi-periodic or chaotic oscillations, potentially subject to synchronization with external or internal perturbations. In Sect. 3 we further develop these ideas in the context of models of so-called teleconnections, representing various forms of correlated behaviour observed in the climate between regions that are geographically distant. Section 4 Synchronization in Climate Dynamics and Other Extended Systems

goes on to consider some simple model systems that may provide some useful insights into a new class of possible synchronized states in extended systems anal- ogous to the climate, coupled via the large-scale axisymmetric components of their circulation. Finally, we offer some concluding remarks and an outlook for further research in Sect. 5. 2 Climate Cycles and Teleconnections The origin of oscillations and cyclic behaviour in the weather and circulation of the atmosphere and oceans has long been of interest to scientists, as well as to those involved in weather-sensitive industries such as agriculture and ﬁsheries. These roughly cyclic oscillations typically vary on time scales from a few weeks to decades and even millennia and longer intervals. They may also either occur across the globe, or focussed in particular geographical areas. In the latter case, however, the inﬂuence of a localised disturbance may be still detectable in remote locations. This is known in the climatological literature as a “teleconnection”. We examine examples of these types of phenomenon in this section, with particular reference to situations where nonlinear synchronization may play a role. 2.1 Cyclic Variations in Climate Variables On some of the longest timescales amenable to quantitative study, the onset and retreat of major glaciations is perhaps the best known example of a cyclic cli- mate phenomenon. Information gleaned from deep ice cores at both polar ice caps show that the volume of the Earth’s polar ice sheets has varied considerably dur- ing the past million years or so from its present conﬁguration, with advancing and retreating glaciation of the mid-latitude regions of both hemispheres taking place with a repeat period of around 100 kyrs. These cyclic glaciations appear to be a comparatively recent phenomenon in geological terms, associated with a gradual cooling of the entire planet since the relatively warm Eocene period, some 55 Myrs ago [5]. A particularly notable feature of these recent glaciation cycles, however, is their apparent relationship to cyclic variations in the Earth’s orbit and rota- tion, known as the Milankovitch cycles after their Serbian discoverer in the early twentieth century. Detailed analyses have indicated a degree of apparent synchro- nization in the phase of the advance and retreat of glaciations with certain com- ponents of the Milankovitch cycles, which mostly include periods of between 18 and 41 kyrs. However, the degree of synchronization continues to be controver- sial [6], not least because the glaciations are dominated by a roughly 100 kyr period which lies outside the main band of orbital and rotational periodicities. It remains unclear, therefore, whether the Milankovitch orbital/rotation cycles force the observed glaciations or merely act as the “pacemaker” [7] of oscillations that would take place with or without such external forcing. 156 P.L. Read and A.A. Castrejon-Pita On much shorter timescales, commonly cited examples of cyclic behaviour in the climate system include the El Niño/Southern Oscillation (ENSO), the Quasi- biennial Oscillation (QBO) in the Earth’s stratosphere, the North Atlantic Oscilla- tion/Arctic Oscillation (NAO/AO) and the so-called “zonal index cycle”. ENSO is perhaps the best known of the interannual climate cycles in the troposphere. It is related to the extent of an accumulation of relatively cool water close to the ocean surface off the coast of equatorial South America, the presence of which is main- tained by coupled circulation patterns in both the Paciﬁc Ocean and the overlying atmosphere. Fluctuations in this coupled circulation leads to occasional weakening, which allows the cold upwelling in the oceans to spread westwards and cause the tropical ocean temperature across the equatorial Paciﬁc to cool signiﬁcantly. Such episodes (known as El Niño events) recur on timescales of 3–6 years, which appear to be mainly determined by the time it takes equatorially trapped Kelvin and Rossby waves in the ocean to cross the Paciﬁc. The shift in ocean surface temperatures then lead to signiﬁcant changes in seasonal climate at many locations across the globe. A particular feature of El Niño events is their tendency to occur at particular times of year (particularly around December – January, hence the name “El Niño” meaning the Christ child), suggesting at least a partial synchronization with the seasonal cycle. The basic mechanism that sets the timescale of the Southern Oscil- lation, however, is not directly affected by the seasonal cycle. But this appears to be another case where an astronomical cycle acts as a partial “pacemaker”, modifying the phase of particular features within an otherwise free (though almost certainly chaotic) oscillation. The stratospheric QBO is another example, in which the annual cycle plays the role of a partial pacemaker. The oscillation manifests itself as a cyclic reversal of the prevailing east – west wind in the tropics at altitudes above 10–15 km above the surface, with a recurrence period of around 24–29 months. It is now widely understood to be a form of relaxation oscillation, driven by the rectiﬁcation of upward-propagating waves originating in the convectively active troposphere [8], with the timescale set by the mean intensity of the convective forcing. This appears to be a ubiquitous form of oscillation in planetary atmospheres, since similar types of behaviour have now been identiﬁed in the stratospheres of Jupiter [9], Saturn [10] and even Venus [11], though on somewhat different timescales. But for the Earth the seasonal cycle itself modulates this convective forcing, allowing the possibility for nonlinear phase-locking effects to modify the onset of wind reversals, which tend to take place at preferred times of the year [12]. The so-called “index cycle” is among the shortest timescale cyclic phenomena in the climate system, being representative of a class of phenomena known as “intraseasonal oscillations”. This was ﬁrst noted in the northern mid-latitude cir- culation over the Atlantic Ocean [13], and appears as a tendency for the main east – west jet stream in the upper troposphere (at altitudes of around 10 km) to alternate between a fast, relatively undisturbed state and a more undulating, “blocked” con- ﬁguration, in which travelling waves are of much larger amplitude but relatively slowly moving. This alternation occurs roughly cyclically at certain times of year on timescales of around 30–50 days, though because of the disturbances to the circulation associated with the contrast between continents and oceans it is often Synchronization in Climate Dynamics and Other Extended Systems 157 difﬁcult to discern. The term “index cycle” refers to a statistical index – the “zonal index”, deﬁned as a measure of the average east-west (zonal) wind between 35◦ and 55◦N – from which timeseries could be constructed that showed evidence for cyclic behaviour, though this often appeared to be highly chaotic. There is a similar phenomenon discernible also in the southern hemisphere, where continentality has a much weaker inﬂuence on the circulation than in the north. Although the latter has been rather less intensively studied, it does reveal this type of cyclic behaviour more clearly (see Fig. 1) than in the northern hemisphere [14]. This is of particular interest, because it appears to represent a nonlinear oscillation associated with cyclic exchanges of energy (potential and kinetic) between travelling baroclinic cyclone waves and the zonally-symmetric component of the circulation. Such wave-zonal ﬂow interactions are the dominant form of nonlinear interactions involving large- scale atmospheric waves, a point we return to in Sect. 3.2. Fig. 1 Sequence of 200 mb geopotential height contours over the southern hemisphere during the summer of 1979, illustrating the alternating of the circulation between “westerly” and “blocked” states during the southern “index cycle”. Figure adapted from [14] 158 P.L. Read and A.A. Castrejon-Pita 2.2 Teleconnections Cyclic phenomena such as the glaciation cycles appear to manifest themselves on a global scale, so can be regarded as oscillations of the entire climate system virtually worldwide. Other types of climate cycles and variations, however, appear to be more conﬁned to particular geographical regions, although their inﬂuence may be felt further aﬁeld in other parts of the world. The North Atlantic Oscillation is one example of such a regional phenomenon that has been studied for almost 200 years [15]. It appears in the form of statistically correlated ﬂuctuations in time between widely separated points spanning the North Atlantic basin, commonly applied to variability on monthly and longer timescales. Such long term, correlated ﬂuctuations are known as “teleconnections”, though the origin and mechanisms for these phenomena are often difﬁcult to determine. But with the development of the large-scale global observing network for weather pre- diction and climate studies, the study of teleconnection phenomena has revealed a number of recurrent and persistent patterns that vary on timescales ranging from the intraseasonal (30–80 days) to the interdecadal. In the case of the NAO, this appears to comprise a combination of ﬂuctuations that include the zonal index cycle mentioned above, on intraseasonal timescales and with a spatial distribution that is largely symmetric about the pole (a so-called “annular mode”) and a more complex pattern of correlation that recurs on interannual timescales [16]. Such complex spatial patterns of correlation often appear to take on a charac- ter akin to a standing wave pattern. This has led to a widely accepted paradigm within climate science of a quasi-linear mechanism for teleconnections that involves the excitation and propagation of large-scale Rossby waves from a speciﬁc source region. The source might consist, for example, of an unusually warm patch of ocean surface, brought about by anomalies in the ocean circulation which, if persistent, may lead to a standing wave pattern aligned along great-circle paths across the globe [17]. The simplest case under this scenario is that the temporal correlation of atmospheric variables between two points in space is due to the fact that these two locations are along the “track” of a major atmospheric anomaly. Another widely discussed interpretation within meteorology and climate for exciting these kinds of correlated ﬂuctuations is to regard them as an aggregation of quasi-stochastic weather events through either a physical or statistical low-pass ﬁlter [18]. Such an approach largely involves the application of linear dynamics, much like the effect of noise on a resonant oscillatory system. There is, however, one further type of teleconnection that has been identiﬁed recently and that is not easily explained in terms of linear dynamics. This involves the identiﬁcation of phase-synchronized behaviour of regional weather events, that would seem to imply a nonlinear phase-locking mechanism between geographi- cally separated meteorological phenomena without recourse to any external forcing. Teleconnections between middle latitude blocking of the Northern and Southern hemispheres, for example, have been diagnosed in climate data [19], manifested as a small but signiﬁcant tendency for such blocking to occur simultaneously in both the northern and southern hemispheres. This was found to be the case, even though Synchronization in Climate Dynamics and Other Extended Systems 159 the events considered singly in each hemisphere appear to be chaotic in time. The blocked states essentially represent a particular phase in the respective zonal index cycles of the two hemispheres, as introduced in the previous subsection. However, the mechanism for producing such correlated behaviour between two hemispheres, often at quite different points in their respective seasonal cycles, is far from clear. 3 Models and Mechanisms for Teleconnection and Synchronization In the previous section we have introduced a number of phenomena within the Earth’s climate system in which cyclic, though usually chaotic, oscillatory behaviour is observed. The origin of such cyclic behaviour is often difﬁcult to determine, how- ever, and so it is helpful to appeal to simpliﬁed models in order to evaluate possi- ble mechanisms. Where synchronized behaviour between two or more oscillatory phenomena is observed, then two distinct questions arise: (a) does the oscillation in one system owe its sole origin to that of the other? or (b) are the two cyclic oscillations sustainable independently but simply brought into a synchronized state through some form of weak coupling? If the latter, how weak and/or intermittent can this coupling be in order to exhibit observable synchronization? 3.1 Distinguishing Synchronized Models from Observations? Where the perturbation is a highly predictable external process, such as the astro- nomical orbit/rotation cycles invoked for the Milankovitch cycles of glaciation, the forcing or synchronization is clearly a unidirectional problem, in which the external forcing inﬂuences the climate system and not vice versa. In this case, it remains controversial as to whether the glaciation cycles would continue in the absence of cyclic variations in orbit and rotational parameters. Because of the very large timescales involved, it is not feasible to make use of comprehensive physical climate models to investigate this problem. Instead, it is necessary to appeal to much simpler models, based typically on energy balance considerations for the land, oceans and cryosphere to represent the integrated response of the Earth on such long timescales. Such low-order models may be very crude in comparison to the real Earth system. Even so, various authors have sought to draw conclusions from studies using low- order energy-balance models in which the actual variation in solar heating at high latitudes due to orbital forcing is applied. An example of such a study is illustrated in Fig. 2, which shows the result of applying various forms of weak orbital forcing to a very simple nonlinear energy balance climate model [20]. A major difﬁculty has emerged, however, in that a wide variety of models appear able to come into synchronization with the applied orbital forcing [20] (see Fig. 2) with little apparent sensitivity to the details of the model itself. The resulting “pre- diction” for ice volume variations then seems able to reproduce the observed varia- tions, provided only that the representation of glaciation in the model is nonlinear. 160 P.L. Read and A.A. Castrejon-Pita Fig. 2 An illustration of phase locking to Milankovitch forcing. The gray curve is a timeseries of the proxy δ18O record representing the observed variations of global temperature; the thin color curves are ice volume time series from different model runs by Tziperman et al. [20] using different initial conditions. (a) A model run with no Milankovitch forcing. (b) Model forced by and phase locked to Milankovitch forcing (65◦N summer insolation). (c) Model run forced by and phase locked to an artiﬁcial, periodic 40 kyr forcing. (d) Model forced by obliquity variations only. (e) Model forced by precession only. (f) Same as (b) but in the presence of noise. Figure from [20] with permission Though clearly encouraging as an indication that even weak Milankovitch perturba- tions in insolation can lead to synchronized glaciation cycles, this result also demon- strates that simple comparisons between forcing input and model predictions are not sufﬁcient to distinguish between even major classes of models very effectively—a clear consequence of synchronization within a dissipative nonlinear system. The situation where synchronization occurs between two autonomous, chaotic components of the climate system may therefore be even more difﬁcult and sub- tle to elucidate. In the synchronized blocking case introduced above, and also in a related study [21] that considers coupling between nearby longitudinal sectors in the same hemisphere, attempts to model this phenomenon have made use of sim- pliﬁed numerical models of ﬂow in a hemispheric channel. Each hemisphere was Synchronization in Climate Dynamics and Other Extended Systems 161 represented as a separate model, and coupling between the hemispheres or sectors was then introduced by adding a heuristic diffusive coupling between pairs of spatial harmonics. For their study, however, Duane & Tribbia [21, 22] chose to couple only selected pairs of wavenumber modes that explicitly excluded |K| < k0, where K is the total wavenumber K2 = k2 + l2, k0 is a constant and k and l are the respective wavenumbers in the zonal and meridional directions. Such a restricted coupling reﬂects the common teleconnection paradigm discussed above, which postulates trains of Rossby-Haurwitz waves as the conduit for dynamical information across the globe, although there is as yet no direct evidence for this mechanism in observa- tions for this mode of coupling in coupled blocking events. Nevertheless, the models thus formulated were able to show evidence for correlated (or, in the case of two sec- tors, anti-correlated) blocking events between hemispheres or sectors in a manner that was at least qualitatively comparable to the observations. However, in light of the remarks given above concerning the Milankovitch forcing, an ability of a given model to reproduce synchronized behaviour does not guarantee that it represents the correct physics of the basic oscillation or coupling without further evidence. 3.2 Zonally Symmetric Coupling Motivated in part by studies over many years of quasi-periodic and chaotic “index cycles” in laboratory experiments [23, 24], we have investigated synchronization effects in a baroclinically unstable channel in which we make the opposite assump- tion to [22] and [21], coupling only via the lowest wavenumber zonally-symmetric components of the ﬂow [25]. Like the study of [21], this work relies on the use of a quasigeostrophic (QG) two-layer formulation of baroclinic and/or barotropic insta- bility. Since the ﬁrst studies of baroclinic waves in the atmosphere, the two-layer model has played an important role. It was proposed more than 50 years ago to encapsulate in the simplest way some of the principal features of the middle latitude atmospheric circulation. Since then, it has been widely used in studies of baroclinic instability [26–29]. The basic model is a two-layer quasi-geostrophic system, for- mulated in Cartesian geometry, and permits just one zonally propagating wave with barotropic and baroclinic components. Hence it is arguably the simplest possible representation of such a system. A schematic diagram of the two-layer system is shown in Fig. 3, commonly known as the “Phillips-Pedlosky” two-layer model [26–29]. It consists of two super- posed ﬂuids conﬁned to a rotating, rectangular, and zonally periodic channel. By convention, layer 1 is at the top and layer 2 is at the bottom. The height of the channel is D, with width L. It was developed using Cartesian co-ordinates, where x, y and z are used respectively to denote displacements along the channel, across the channel, and vertically. Periodic boundary conditions are applied in x. The cor- responding velocities are un,vn and wn, where n = 1,2 refers to the upper and lower layer respectively. The densities of the upper and lower layer are ρ1 and ρ2, with ρ2 > ρ1. The analysis carried out by [30, 31] was conducted in a reference frame that moved with the zonal velocity, (u1 + u2)/2, of the mean ﬂow. Therefore, both 162 P.L. Read and A.A. Castrejon-Pita Fig. 3 The two-layer model considered in this project: two immiscible ﬂuids of densities ρ1 and ρ2 with ρ1 < ρ2. The ﬂuids are in relative motion, with velocities of +U/2 and −U/2 respectively. The channel has height D, width L and is rotating at a constant angular velocity Ω the upper and lower layers appear to be in uniform motion along the channel in this frame of reference, with respective velocities of +U/2 and −U/2, becoming +1/2 and −1/2 in non-dimensional terms. In the absence of motion, the ﬂuid layers are assumed here to have equal depths of D/2. To simulate the experimental conditions, the ﬂuid is conﬁned vertically between two rigid planes representing a base and a

lid. The kinematic viscosity within both layers is assumed to be equal. For maximum simplicity, a 5-dimensional version of the model was considered [30, 31], representing a spectrally highly truncated formulation that describes the interaction of a single baroclinic wave and a zonal ﬂow. The basic 5-dimensional model equations can also be represented in complex form as a 3-equation formula- tion (1), in which the ﬁrst equation in the complex variable X describes a barotropic travelling wave component, the next equation in Y (also complex) represents the baroclinic travelling wave (with the same zonal wavenumber) and the third compo- nent Z represents the (real) amplitude of the baroclinic zonal ﬂow component. The resulting system of equations is almost identical to the well known 3-component complex Lorenz equations [31]. ˙X = −σ X + σ Y, ˙Y = RX − aY − XZ, ˙Z = −bZ + 1 2 (cid:5) X ∗ Y + XY (cid:6) ∗ , (1) where σ and b are real numbers signifying the Prandtl number of the ﬂuid, and the aspect ratio of the system respectively, and R (the “Rayleigh number”) and a are complex parameters (in contrast to the original complex Lorenz equations). In the study by [25], an external periodic forcing was added (via the baro- clinic zonal velocity component) to this model in order to allow the generation of various degrees of synchronized states, depending on the frequency detuning between the natural amplitude modulation oscillation of the system and the forcing. Synchronization in Climate Dynamics and Other Extended Systems 163 Investigations were carried out in the three principal ﬂow regimes that the model exhibited, a steady amplitude wave regime, an amplitude-modulated (quasi-periodic amplitude vacillation or AV) regime and a chaotic amplitude-modulated regime. In the steady regime, amplitude resonance at certain forcing frequencies was found, in which the initial unperturbed travelling wave solution grew in amplitude as certain frequencies in the perturbation were approached. In the AV regime with relatively small amplitudes of forcing, classical “Arnol’d tongues” and synchroniza- tion were found, in which the natural frequency of amplitude modulation within the model became phase-locked to that of the external perturbation. This implies that the amplitude variations in the travelling wave became entrained with the zonally sym- metric forcing. Such entrainment was only possible because of the strongly nonlin- ear wave-zonal ﬂow interaction that underlies the basic instability that sustains the growth of the travelling wave. The translation speed and frequency of the travelling wave were not directly modulated by the external perturbation, but were affected indirectly by the perturbation though not explicitly phase-locked. With moderate forcing amplitudes in this regime, period doubling cascades were found, leading ultimately to an induced or enhanced chaotic state. An interesting aspect of these results was the clear ability of the system to phase lock to harmonics of the applied perturbation frequency. Thus, in Figs. 4 and 5 we see evidence of locked states in frequency ratios corresponding to period 2, 3 and so on up to period 8, although the frequency width of such high order synchronized states is then very narrow. Fig. 4 Maximum and minimum zonal ﬂow amplitudes, Xmin and Xmax, as a function of pertur- bation frequency γ for forcing amplitude (cid:14) = 0.005 for the amplitude vacillation regime in the periodically perturbed model of [25] 164 P.L. Read and A.A. Castrejon-Pita 0.06 0.05 0.04 ε 0.03 0.02 0.01 0 0.05 0.06 0.07 0.08 0.09 0.11 0.12 0.13 0.14 0.15 0.1 γ Fig. 5 The amplitude vacillation regime: plot of frequency-locked regions in the periodically per- turbed model of Eccles et al. [25]. Period 1 +, period 2 +, period 3 o, period 4 +, period 5 o, period 6 o, period 7 (cid:2), period 8 +. Note the ﬁelds have not been contoured as they are highly complex and contouring may give a misleading impression In contrast, when the system was run in a chaotic, amplitude-modulated regime (when unperturbed), the introduction of periodic forcing was able to suppress this chaotic behavior at particular regions in the parameter space, via a form of open-loop chaos control. Thus, despite employing a very restricted form of coupling that only perturbs the zonally symmetric component of the ﬂow, there was clearly enough nonlinearity and dissipation within the system to exhibit a fairly full range of partial and complete synchronization phenomena. More recently, the approach of [25] has been extended to allow for the coupling of two non-identical 5-dimensional baroclinic channel models, effectively repre- senting the zonally-symmetric coupling of two hemispheres or zonal sectors [32]. The interaction between the two models was achieved by introducing a linear coupling term in the response or slave system, in the case of a master-slave conﬁg- uration or in both models in the case of mutual or bidirectional conﬁguration. This coupling term is proportional to the difference between the different variables of the system of the form: dX1 dt dX2 dt = G(X1) + η1E(X2 − X1), = G(X2) + η2E(X1 − X2). (2a) (2b) where E is the matrix that determines the linear combination of the components of X1,2 that will be used to couple the systems, and η1 and η2 are the coupling Synchronization in Climate Dynamics and Other Extended Systems 165 strengths. If η2 = 0 (the same applies for η1 = 0) a typical master-slave conﬁgu- ration is obtained. On the other hand, if η2 = η1 a symmetrical mutual coupling is achieved. So far, we have only used these two conﬁgurations. The de-tuning between the systems was produced by having different values for the rotational Froude num- ber, F1,2. By choosing ⎛ ⎝ ⎞ ⎠ 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 E = and taking into consideration the 3-equation formulation of our uncoupled systems (1) we introduce a zonally symmetric coupling on the Z component of the system. Although this approach is formally ad hoc, it is noteworthy that it has the same form as Newton’s law of cooling dT/dt = K(T0 − T), which is appropriate for forced convective heat transfer. The latter is essentially how the thermal boundary condi- tions are maintained in typical baroclinic annulus experiments. This is therefore, a form of coupling that will directly link the amplitudes of the baroclinic zonally symmetric ﬂow components of the two systems. Investigations using the master-slave conﬁguration (η1 = 0) [32] have demon- strated the ability of this simple system to exhibit various degrees of synchro- nization in both periodic and chaotic states. It was also found that the frequency range over which synchronized states were found, for low and moderate coupling strengths, increased with increasing η, following an Arnol’d tongue-like behaviour. Larger coupling strengths led to period-doubling and higher order (2:1) phase synchronization. This system has also proved fruitful for the application of the auxiliary system approach [33] as a means of seeking evidence for generalised synchronization, in the form of yet another degree of synchronization. It was generally found that larger values of η are needed to cross the boundary from phase synchronized states to fully synchronized states in the generalised sense. It was also found that larger coupling strengths were needed to obtain phase synchronization in chaotic regimes than in periodic ones. Some investigations were also carried out by coupling the system in mixed states, i.e. the master system was run in a region in parameter space where the dynamics was periodic, while the slave system was in a chaotic one. This can be interpreted as a direct extension of the periodically forced system mentioned above and described by Eccles et al. [25]. Likewise, phase synchronization and signs of chaos control and chaos-destroying synchronization were also found. For the bidirectional coupling case (η1 = η2), signatures of mutual synchroniza- tion such as imperfect phase synchronization (Fig. 6) and complete phase synchro- nization were detected [32] in both periodic and chaotic regimes. Complex effects such as oscillation quenching were also found, which do not have an equivalent in the unidirectionally coupled systems. In this case, in contrast to the previous sce- nario of unidirectional coupling, both sub-systems are affected by the coupling, and the observed amplitude modulation frequencies of the two systems were brought 166 P.L. Read and A.A. Castrejon-Pita Fig. 6 Behaviour of a mutually (symmetric) coupled system in a chaotic state, for which Fa = 13, Fb = 13.55, and η = 0.02. (a) Time series for system 1 (black line) and system 2 (green line); (b) Lissajous ﬁgure from plotting Za(t) against Zb(t); (c) Frequency spectra for system 1 (black line) and system 2 (green line); (d) Phase difference (cid:31)φ(t) between Z of the system 1 and system 2. Notice that system 2 loses one cycle against system 1 at around Time= 4,600 in (a) and its correspondent phase slip in (d); this is a clear signature of imperfect phase synchronization together to oscillate at a common frequency. In this conﬁguration, it was found that the synchronized regions in the coupling-strength/de-tuning diagram (shown in Fig. 7 for the chaotic case) are quite symmetrical. It is also observed that relatively large coupling strengths are needed to reach full phase synchronization for relatively Fig. 7 The chaotic modulated amplitude vacillation regime: diagram of synchronized regions in the mutually coupled model developed in [32]. Unsynchronized •, imperfect phase synchronized (phase slips) •, phase synchronized •, oscillation quenching • Synchronization in Climate Dynamics and Other Extended Systems 167 small de-tunings (when compared to the master-slave situation). It was also found that, for moderate coupling and detuning, there was a region between unsynchro- nized behaviour and oscillation quenching which exhibited imperfect synchroniza- tion (shown as black dots in Fig. 7). To the knowledge of the authors this is some- thing that has not been reported before. Apart from this imperfectly locked region, the synchronization regime diagram of our system looks similar to others reported in the literature, such as in [2]. Investigations of mixed states showed (at least for the chosen set of parameters) that moderate coupling strengths stabilized and synchronized the systems (e.g. the periodic system remained in a periodic regime while the chaotic system switched to a periodic regime), whilst with relatively strong coupling the periodic system became chaotic, but the synchronized state was preserved. It would be of interest to investigate whether this behaviour is found more generally in other systems, such as in coupled Rössler and/or Lorenz systems. 4 Laboratory Analogues of Zonally-Symmetric Synchronization Low order mathematical models of the type discussed in the previous section can provide a great deal of useful insight into the range of possible phenomena that a real physical system might exhibit, provided that physical system can be rea- sonably assumed to behave as if it was a ﬁnite-dimensional dynamical system. For a spatially-extended system, however, such as in a ﬂuid or other continuum, this assumption of restricted dimensionality is by no means guaranteed. For these kinds of system (which, of course, include geophysical systems such as the Earth’s atmospheric and oceanic circulation), it is important, therefore, to investigate the applicability of insights obtained from low-dimensional systems with some care. One approach to this question is to conduct carefully-controlled experiments in the laboratory on ﬂuid ﬂows that encapsulate at least some of the basic physical attributes of spatially-extended geophysical systems. Such experiments are not as easy to implement and control as simpliﬁed numerical models, but at least allow the possibility of testing some of the broader implications of simple model studies in a more physical context. Given the difﬁculties raised above concerning the ambiguity of simple comparisons between model simulations of synchronized behaviour and observed responses in geophysical systems, the capability of laboratory systems to conduct repeatable experiments to test particular model hypotheses can be a partic- ular strength. 4.1 Periodic Perturbations In the present context of baroclinic zonal index cycles, experimental work on externally-perturbed synchronization has recently been performed [34] using a mod- iﬁed version of the so-called thermally driven, rotating baroclinic annulus [23, 24]. 168 P.L. Read and A.A. Castrejon-Pita Fig. 8 Atmospheric equivalent of the baroclinic annulus experiment As shown schematically in Fig. 8, this system consists of a cylindrical annulus of a working ﬂuid conﬁned between two coaxial, thermally-conducting cylinders that are rotated at uniform angular velocity Ω about their common (vertical) axis of symmetry. The combined effect of differential heating ((cid:31)T) in the horizontal direc- tion and uniform background rotation leads to the formation of a zonally-symmetric baroclinic jet ﬂow around the annulus that may become unstable to travelling baro- clinic waves under suitable conditions. The system has been extensively studied over many years and is well known to exhibit a wide range of ﬂow regimes under steady rotation and applied thermal contrast (cid:31)T, including pure, axisymmetric ﬂow, steady amplitude travelling waves, periodic amplitude modulated waves and a range of more complex spatiotemporal ﬂows, culminating in forms of geostrophic tur- bulence. Under weakly unstable conditions, however, the simple low-dimensional mathematical system discussed in the previous section appears to provide a reason- able qualitative model for the ﬁrst few bifurcations from axisymmetric ﬂow in the experiment. Like the simple model study discussed in the previous section, the investiga- tion of [34] was focused on the study of the frequency entrainment of the natu- ral amplitude vacillation of the baroclinic wave by an external, zonally-symmetric, cyclic forcing produced by periodically varying the temperature contrast between the inner and outer sidewalls of the annulus. When the forcing was applied to quasi-periodic amplitude-modulated wave regimes, phase locking and frequency entrainment between the applied forcing and the natural frequency of the amplitude modulation was found in a form that closely resembles what was seen in the simple, low-order model of [25]. The frequency range over which such locked states were found varied with the amplitude of the applied forcing, producing a classical Arnol’d tongue (see Fig. 9). When the detuning was increased, sporadic phase slips and eventually a quasi- periodic behavior was found. Synchronization was even found when forcing was applied with twice the period of the natural modulation frequency. This is illus- trated in Fig. 10, which shows the onset of phase-locking with the response occur- ring at twice the frequency of the imposed forcing. It was therefore concluded Synchronization in Climate Dynamics and Other Extended Systems 169 Fig. 9 Parametric variation of partial and complete phase synchronization between the periodic forcing and temperature amplitude of m = 3 as a function of amplitude (cid:14) and frequency ω of the forcing, close to the 1:1 ratio between forcing and the natural vacillation frequencies in the experiment of [34]. Dotted lines represent boundaries between different synchronized states: PS denotes full phase synchronization, PPS partial phase synchronization, and NS unsynchronized behavior. Different symbols denote different experimental runs that synchronization of the natural amplitude modulation frequency by zonally- symmetric external forcing is readily achieved, even in the presence of experimental noise and ﬂuctuations in experimental control, suggesting that such synchronized states are robust and potentially observable in nature. Fig. 10 (a) Extract of the temperature variation of the baroclinic wave (continuous line) and the imposed external forcing (broken line). (b) Time variation of the phase difference (cid:31)φ between the external forcing and the amplitude modulation of m = 3, for periodic forcing with (cid:14) = 0.6 K and period τ = 400 s. Natural vacillation period τv = 180 s 170 P.L. Read and A.A. Castrejon-Pita 4.2 Mutual Synchronization Experiments If we regard the thermally-driven rotating annulus system as a well established ana- logue of mid-latitude cyclogenesis in large-scale atmospheric and oceanic ﬂow, the externally forced experiment discussed above can be considered, to some extent, to emulate an effect that seasonal forcing may have on the dynamics of large-scale planetary waves in the atmosphere. A pair of thermally coupled annulus experi- ments could then be interpreted as analogous to a “complete” planet, where both hemispheres or two sectors of the same hemisphere (represented by each annulus, cf. Fig. 11) are solely interacting through the equatorial/tropical regions, in the same spirit as Duane et al. (1999). At the time of writing, this work is still ongoing, although a number of prelim- inary experiments so far, where either the coupling strength or the de-tuning were varied, have showed clear signs of phase synchronization. In the same way as in the numerical work presented above, synchronization was studied in both periodic and chaotic regimes as well as in mixed states. By varying the mismatch between the systems (by setting slightly different temperature contrasts in each system) we could move from completely uncorrelated behaviour between the two sub-systems, to imperfectly phase-synchronized states (phase slips) and ﬁnally to fully synchro- nized regimes (though the latter was found only in the periodic case). An exam- ple of these experimental results showing phase synchronization, visible here via a Lissajous plot, is shown in Fig. 12. The parameters for this particular experiment are, in terms of the thermal Rossby number (!) and Taylor number (Ta), !M = 0.656, !S = 0.643, and TaM = TaS = 3.778 × 106, where ! = gα(cid:31)TD "2L2 , (3) Fig. 11 Left: Schematic diagram of the two coupled annuli via the circulating water of the outer circuit. (a) Uncoupled, (b) Strongly coupled, and (c) its geophysical equivalent. Arrows represent interhemispheric coupling Synchronization in Climate Dynamics and Other Extended Systems 171 Fig. 12 Two temperature signals originating from the coupled system are shown in (a) and its corresponding Lissajous ﬁgure in (b) (master system is shown in a solid line and slave system in a dashed line). Introduction of the coupling between the systems adjusts the frequencies and phases, although the amplitudes remain different. A circular structure in the coupled case in the Lissajous plot is typical of two signals at the same frequency and a constant phase shift g is the acceleration due to gravity, α the thermal expansion coefﬁcient, D the depth of the annulus, L the gap width and Ta = 4"2L5 ν2D . (4) The subindexes “M” and “S” stand for master or slave systems respectively. Although the coupling used so far in our experiments is quite schematic when compared with explicit geophysical analogues such as in a baroclinic, midlatitude storm zone in the atmosphere or oceans, there is no reason to believe that the occur- rence of synchronization effects is particularly sensitive to the precise way in which the “slave” system is perturbed by the “master”, so long as the inﬂuence is coherent and mainly via the zonal mean ﬂow (or at least on a larger scale than that of the propagating waves). The key result, however, is that a clear route to synchronization is found in a real system of fully-developed baroclinic waves, even via relatively weak, zonally- symmetric coupling. 5 Discussion It is now widely recognized that a thorough understanding of the environment and climate of the Earth, and the development of methods to predict its future behaviour and responses to changes in factors such as atmospheric composition and exter- nal forcing, requires a holistic consideration of the entire Earth system. Such an approach views the Earth in terms of a hierarchical ensemble of distinct sub-systems (the troposphere, stratosphere, oceans, cryosphere, land surface and biosphere, for example), all mutually interacting via complex coupling and feedback processes and subject to time-varying external forces (such as the diurnal and annual cycles, and other external processes on longer timescales). Even within these subsystems, 172 P.L. Read and A.A. Castrejon-Pita such as in the general circulation of the atmosphere itself, distinct circulation sys- tems and sub-processes can be identiﬁed, each of which will interact with other components of the general circulation on various space and time scales, leading to complex behaviours which may be very difﬁcult to predict. Such a view of the Earth System underpins many modern approaches to modelling the Earth’s present and past climates, and more recently also to evaluating socio-economic and ecological responses to such changes. In a system as complex as the Earth, interactions between sub-systems are likely themselves to be highly complex, intermittent and nonlinear, presenting enormous challenges to the modelling community to represent accurately and realistically. In this context, a knowledge and understanding of generic interactions between dynam- ical systems in the presence of nonlinearity is vital to guide the future development of modelling strategies. Until recently, the approach of the climate science com- munity has tended to focus upon methods based on linearised theory to guide the formulation of modelling and theoretical interpretations of observed phenomena. Until very recently (early ∼ 2000 s), for example, linear cross-correlation techniques have formed the main analysis tools in the study of atmospheric teleconnection pat- terns, although these essentially only compare the amplitude ﬂuctuations in climate records. However, methodologies deriving from nonlinear systems are beginning to be more widely recognized, amongst which are those pertaining to synchronized net- works and coupled systems. References , for example, have shown that nonlinear phase analyses, developed from the study of simple, nonlinear synchro- nized systems, can reveal more subtle connections between systems when applied to detect correlations between “teleconnected” atmospheric phenomena, such as El Niño and the Indian Monsoon, or rainfall patterns over Oxford and Vienna linked to the NAO. They have demonstrated that some subtle entrainments and coherence associated with higher order synchronization are invisible to conventional correla- tion techniques and that, in general, nonlinear phase analysis produced better quan- titative results, in particular in the estimation of the phase lag/difference between two oscillatory phenomena. It is likely, therefore, that there are many other cyclic phenomena in which some subtle but signiﬁcant degrees of synchronization could be revealed if studied with modern time series tools based on the phase analysis and phase synchronization approaches. The existence of such synchronization effects may have a strong inﬂuence on the behaviour of the system and its potential pre- dictability. The potential implications of synchronized behaviour, either due to external per- turbations or associated with mutual interactions of internal, though geographically separated, components of the climate system may be very substantial, both with regard to the potential predictability of the system (even if it behaves chaotically) and to the interpretation of comparisons between model predictions and observa- tions. The latter especially emphasises the need for careful and repeatable experi- mentation, as well as more straightforward operational forecast veriﬁcation against ongoing synoptic analyses of observations. The possibility that synchronization, and the coupling that leads to associated phase-locking, could itself vary with time is another factor that is only just beginning Synchronization in Climate Dynamics and Other Extended Systems 173 to receive attention. But two recent studies [35, 37] have indicated that the onset of synchronization between disparate climate signals can be stimulated by discrete events, such as a major volcanic eruption. In the immediate future, it would now seem timely to begin to concentrate on somewhat less well studied examples of climate cycles, including those with timescales that are more closely analogous to those in our laboratory experiments. One possible candidate, and perhaps closest in concept to the experimental ana- logue presented in [32, 34], is the application of synchronization diagnostics to intraseasonal cyclic oscillations in the tropics and extra-tropics. Cyclic variations at tropical latitudes in the troposphere are typically dominated by the well known Madden-Julian oscillation (MJO), with a timescale of around 40–50 days [38, 39]. This oscillation is thought to arise from a coupled atmosphere-ocean wave, ener- gised by atmospheric convection, whose distribution is inﬂuenced by patterns in tropical sea surface temperatures (SSTs). However, the detailed mechanism for its occurrence is still not well reproduced in most large-scale atmospheric models, and appears to entail the interaction of processes on a wide range of different scales. This is probably one reason why modelling the MJO has been difﬁcult, and some recent attempts using so-called “aquaplanet” models are just starting to be able to reproduce it, [40]. Oscillations on similar timescales (20–60 days) are also evident in mid-latitude observational timeseries, as revealed, for example, in those of atmo- spheric angular momentum by [41]. However, it remains unclear as to what relation, if any, these mid-latitude cycles have to the MJO, and what are the mechanisms for such interactions. In Fig. 13 we show a plot of the latitude-frequency dependence of observed atmospheric angular momentum over a 10 year time interval. This is close to what our idealized, zonally-symmetrically coupled experiment aims to emulate: two mid-latitude (interacting) zones where zonally-symmetric atmospheric cyclic phenomena are developing on a 10–100 day timescale, i.e. somewhat longer than the timescale of individual weather events. In this ﬁgure, one can observe that the dominant feature at tropical latitudes is the Madden – Julian Oscillation, with an average period of approximately 50 days. It is also possible to identify various other intraseasonal oscillations in the extra-tropics. For example, in the Southern hemi- sphere (around 40◦S), an oscillation with a period of around 50–60 days is clear. Also, both hemispheres have evident oscillations with periods of approximately 43 days. Other oscillations at several other time scales are also recognizable, such as a feature with a period of ∼ 20 days in the Northern Hemisphere and another with a period of 30–31 days in both hemispheres. Even though some of these extra-tropical oscillations have periods very similar to the MJO, it is not yet clear whether or not those phenomena are at all connected. Synchronization diagnostics applied to time- series of MJO and these extra-tropical intraseasonal indices (similar to those used to produce Fig. 13), for example, could reveal the existence and nature of such a relation and any subtle or intermittent coherence more clearly than in previous work. With regard to the climate system in general, it is also pertinent to ask why evi- dence for synchronization in the atmosphere and oceans is not more widespread? It is possible that this lack if evidence is due in part to the use of only linear cor- relation methods in most studies to date. Imperfect and intermittent forms of phase 174 P.L. Read and A.A. Castrejon-Pita Fig. 13 Latitude-frequency dependence of observed atmospheric angular momentum, as shown by a contour plot of power spectral density. Taken from [41] synchronization (showing characteristic phase slips), and higher order synchroniza- tion states could therefore be underlying the dynamics of some atmospheric phe- nomena, but have yet to be convincingly detected. There are, for example, roughly quasi-biennial oscillations in both the stratosphere (the well-known QBO, see [8]) and in the upper ocean/troposphere (called the Tropospheric Biennial Oscillation, or TBO, [42]), yet they rarely seem to stay entrained or in phase for very long (see for example [43, 44]). This suggests either that the dynamical coupling between the two processes may be very weak or it may not be constant in time, and therefore, perhaps, active only during part of the year. Such a situation would probably pro- duce frequent phase slips that may be hard to detect as coherent synchronization by traditional methods. The possible consequences of such an intermittent coupling for the observability of synchronization is another aspect of the problem that could be studied fruitfully within a laboratory experiment such as the coupled rotating annulus system dis- cussed above. Such an extension to the experimental study could allow the quantiﬁ- cation of the signature of such a scenario, and hopefully assist in devising a strategy for its detection in climate data.

The manner in which deterministic nonlinear dynamical systems syn- chronize differs signiﬁcantly from the analogous phenomenon in stochastic systems. In this brief review, we discuss the basic issues pertaining to synchrony in the pres- ence of stochasticity. This issue has gained in importance in recent years in part due to the study of ﬁnite systems. In particular, biological processes at the cellular and sub cellular level are subject to large ﬂuctuations and nevertheless exhibit signiﬁcant temporal correlations over a wide range of time-scales. The emergence and main- tenance of stochastic synchrony is thus of fundamental importance, and we discuss some illustrative cases. 1 Introduction Synchronization has been a major theme of studies in nonlinear science since the 1990s. The realization that appropriate coupling can cause deterministic chaotic dynamical systems to completely synchronize [1, 2] catalyzed a number of appli- cations notably those that dealt with communication [3] and control [4]. The major developments in the study of synchronization in nonlinear systems have been sum- marized in a recent monograph [5] where the different forms of synchrony that are currently realized are discussed in detail. When all the variables of two cou- pled systems vary identically, they are said to be in complete synchrony [5]. The dynamics can be in phase, out of phase, or with a time delay, in which case it is termed lag synchrony [6]. In phase synchrony [7], the amplitudes are uncorrelated but the phases are locked with respect to each other, and when the variables have a unique functional relation to one another, the systems are said to display generalized synchronization [8]. Recognition of the importance of extending these concepts to stochastic dynam- ical systems has come from two distinct streams of research. The ﬁrst deals with synchrony in the presence of (usually experimental) noise, and considerable effort has gone into showing that many of the mechanisms for synchronization are robust to external noise [9]. The second, which is more fundamental, deals with the process of synchronization in systems that are subject to intrinsic noise [10], where the evo- lution of the systems themselves is contingent on stochastic dynamical processes. Important examples of this latter class are biological systems which exhibit syn- chrony at macroscopic as well as microscopic scales [11–13]. Detailed studies of cooperative behaviour at the cellular (or even higher) level, and of the dynamics of subcellular processes in the past several years has established that stochasticity plays an important role in many biological phenomena [14–16]. Similarly, some of the most spectacular instances of synchrony in nature also come from biology: entire populations of ﬁreﬂies are known to ﬂash synchronously [17] and a population of cells, say yeast, can be made to divide synchronously [18]. The manner in which such synchrony arises can be traced in different cases to different causes: inter- organism communication or quorum sensing [19] being two well known means. The existence of circadian clocks in organisms ranging from cyanobacteria [20] to mammals [21] and the consequent adjustment of internal processes to the day – night cycle suggests that there are a variety of different mechanisms that can be effective in synchronizing stochastic systems. Extensive studies of deterministic dynamical systems, largely in the past two decades, have shown that in general, synchronization occurs in one of the following scenarios. • The simplest is when identical dynamical systems are mutually weakly coupled [22], usually linearly. The case of nonlinear coupling has also been considered, more as a consequence of the manner in which speciﬁc systems may interact- for instance, the coupling of neurons [23]. • Chaotic synchronization is most commonly associated with one-way coupling, the so-called “master-slave” scenario [2]: one of the systems drives the other and is consequently unaffected by the dynamics of the response • A third situation is when two identical systems are subject to a common drive. In this case the two systems exhibit mutual synchronization and their response to the drive is termed generalized synchrony [8]. As has also been extensively studied in the past decades, the systems under consid- eration need not be identical; the synchronization phenomenon persists under a fair level of parameter mismatch. For stochastic systems, the above deﬁnitions – indeed the basic notions – need to be modiﬁed and in the past few years, a number of different studies have addressed this issue, both from the point of view of uncovering the essential strategies by which systems can synchronize, to quantitative and analytical studies on the effect of noise and stochasticity on the dynamics. The term stochastic synchronization has itself been used quite variably in the literature, although always in reference to dynamical systems where the evolution has a noise-governed component [24, 25]. This can be either additive or multi- plicative noise, and common examples of where these considerations are of impor- tance is in neuronal dynamics or in other biological systems. Almost any exper- imental situation has some level of noise that is unavoidable. Given this context, therefore, it is also commonly associated with the phenomenon of stochastic res- onance, and a number of studies have discussed the parallels between the two phenomena [26]. Two of the central issues that are germane to the notion of synchrony in stochastic systems were already pointed out over 40 years ago by Stratonovich [27]. One is that stochastic systems can properly only show phase synchronization rather than complete synchronization, and the other, that inherent ﬂuctuations can interfere with the maintenance of synchronization: stochastic systems can drift in and out of phase synchrony if the noise is sufﬁciently intense. What does it mean for stochastic systems to synchronize? Consider deterministic nonlinear oscillators for which a phase can be deﬁned quite generally. Two such coupled oscillators have the equations of motion dxi dt = Fi(x, α) + (cid:14)Gi(xi, xj), i, j = 1,2.

The phase synchronized state can then be deﬁned rigorously by ﬁrst deﬁning phases φi(t) for the two (sub)systems, and requiring that they maintain a constant well- deﬁned phase difference as a function of time. Clearly, something analogous can be deﬁned for stochastic dynamics as well so long as there is ﬁrst a sense of oscillation, and secondly, a phase-like variable. Fortunately, in a number of stochastic systems, these conditions are met. The present subject is one whose scope is vast, with potential applicability in disciplines ranging from nanoscience [28] to economics [29]. In this review, how- ever, we will conﬁne our attention to the following aspects: (i) What is the effect of noise on synchrony, and (ii) how can stochastic systems be coupled in order that they synchronize. In the following section, we describe measures for the detection of synchrony in stochastic systems before proceeding to discuss noise-induced synchronization in Sect. 3. Section 4 is devoted to the analysis of different mechanisms for the coupling of stochastic systems in order to cause them to synchronize. Examples from the recent literature that pertain to systems and synthetic biology are reviewed. The article concludes with a summary. We ﬁrst address the issue of how the synchronization of stochastic signals may be detected (or judged). In general, quantitative measures for assessing the syn- chronization of any two different signals, say s1(t) and s2(t), are commonly based on the distance between them, or on some function of this distance, ds1,s2 (t) = → 0, ||s1(t) − s2(t)||. In the synchronous state, the signals are identical and ds1,s2 and the trajectory of the coupled system is conﬁned to a lower dimensional sub- space, the synchronization manifold [5]. In situations where phase synchronization obtains, one considers the phases of the two signals, namely φ1(t) and φ2(t), and phase locking is achieved when Δφ = mφ1(t) − nφ2(t) = Constant.

The above deﬁnitions which are inspired by the study of linear or nonlinear oscil- lators can be extended to the case of chaotic signals as well although there may or may not be a sense of “phase” or indeed of “oscillation”. Indeed, as shown by Gabor [30], given any signal sj(t), it is possible to deﬁne its phase through the so-called analytical signal approach. The Hilbert transform of sj(t) is given by ˜sj(t) = 1 π PV (cid:17) +∞ −∞ sj(t) t − τ dτ

where PV denotes the Cauchy principal value. The instantaneous phase φj(t) and amplitude Aj(t) can then be deﬁned through the following identity, sj(t) + i˜sj(t) = Aj(t) exp iφj(t).

When the signals s1(t) and s2(t) are the outcomes of stochastic processes, the above deﬁnitions need adaptation. The distance between the two signals is unlikely to be zero but is bounded within a limit that depends on the level of stochasticity. Fig. 1 Chaotic synchronization of two Rössler oscillators within the master-slave coupling sce- nario. Starting from different initial conditions in the phase space, the trajectories of two systems, shown in (a) and (b) rapidly synchronize, converging onto the synchronization manifold as shown in (c). Standard parameters are taken1, and the coupling is as indicated in [2] 1 In standard notation [5] the parameters of the two Rössler oscillators are a = 0.2, b = 0.2, c = 5.7, and the drive variable is y.

and thus the nature of synchronization in the presence of stochasticity is in a sense blurred. It is often clearer to judge phase synchrony since the Hilbert phase can be computed in a straightforward manner, but as already indicated by Stratonovich [27] the phase difference between two signals can also drift owing to intrinsic noise [10]. One may also use the idea of a similarity function or its generalizations to examine whether this quantity reaches a sufﬁciently low minimum for speciﬁc τ ; this would allow for the detection of lag synchrony between stochastic signals. Some (but not all) studies of stochastic systems have used the above criteria which can clearly provide suitable quantitative measures for detecting synchronization.

As discussed above, there are a number of common coupling scenarios through which two systems might synchronize. Further, the nature of the synchrony itself can be complete, phase, lag, or generalized. To judge the robustness of the synchronization, it is customary to subject the coupled systems to external perturbations such as additive noise. This is crucial if the synchrony is to be detected in experiments, and its importance has been appreciated in most of these studies. Within a master-slave setting, noise or drift in the drive can induce simi- lar drift in the response, although synchronization in this scenario is very robust, persisting till high levels of noise. There is another source of stochasticity in this context. Practically speaking, two systems can never be identical, and thus when considering an ensemble of coupled systems, this dispersion in system parameters should also be taken into account. It has been shown that in general, the deviation from synchrony depends on both the degree to which the parameters are not identical, the strength of the noise, and its correlation properties. In general, in a population of N oscillators, ˙Xi= F(Xi) + (cid:14)G(X) + σ ξ i(t), i = 1, . . . , N (6) will synchronize for appropriate coupling G, for sufﬁciently large. When noise ξ of amplitude σ is added to each unit of an assembly of synchronized oscillators the usual effect is to cause desynchronization if the noise is uncorrelated, namely if ξi(t)ξj(t) = 0 for i /= j. The behaviour is different, depending on what the dynamics of the noise-free system is: when this is periodic, the effect is less pronounced than when the motion is chaotic.

Convergence of chaotic orbits in the logistic mapping x → 4x(1 − x) + η under identical additive noise η. The distance of two trajectories subject to the same uniform random noise dis- tributed in the interval [−W,W] is computed, subjecting these to successively increasing noise (see [34] for details). The average distance between pairs of trajectories decreases with time, displaying increased order under the inﬂuence of additive noise A surprising result is that when uncoupled systems ((cid:14) = 0) are subject to iden- tical noise, ξi ≡ ξ , this leads, somewhat counterintuitively, to increased ordering. The operative caveat is that the uncoupled systems should be identical as well, but starting with studies of mappings and ﬂows that were subject to stochastic modu- lation [34], a considerable body of work has been built up to show that this effect is robust. An instance of synchronization by common noise of chaotic orbits in the logistic map is shown in Fig. 2 (after [34]). As consequence of noise-induced order is that uncoupled systems that are subject to identical noise will respond in the same ordered state, namely they will synchronize, and a number of studies have addressed the mechanisms underlying noise-induced synchrony. This effect, of noise-induced complete synchronization of identical chaotic sys- tems, has led to some controversy. The conclusion that strong enough noise can synchronize chaotic systems appears oxymoronic, and explanations ranged from ﬁnite precision effects to the role of bias, namely the nonzero mean of applied noise. However, as shown by Zhou and Kurths [35], the mechanism leading to complete synchronization by a common additive noise is the existence of a region in the phase space where there is signiﬁcant contraction. Further, if the nature of stochastic modulation is such that a given system can occasionally explore those regions of phase space that give rise to negative local Lyapunov exponents, namely converging dynamics, then noise will be able to induce statistical phase synchronization. Shown in Fig. 3 are the Lyapunov exponents as a function of noise intensity in model chaotic oscillators subject to common noise [35]. In the case of Rössler oscil- lators, there is no signiﬁcat contraction region, so noise induced synchrony cannot be realized here (Fig. 3a, c), unlike the Lorenz case (Fig. 3b, d). Noise-induced synchronization is very likely to be observed in homoclinic chaotic systems: in such Stochastic Synchronization The largest Lyapunov exponents λ1 and average synchronization error between two oscil- lators with common noise as a function of the noise intensity D. (a) and (c) In the case of two Rössler oscillators, there is no noise-induced synchrony, while in (b) and (d) two Lorenz systems synchronize for D ≥ 31. From [35] systems, chaotic trajectories pass by an unstable ﬁxed point (a saddle), leaving the ﬁxed point along the unstable manifold, and reinject along a strongly contracting sta- ble manifold. By adding low amplitude noise, synchronization of two such identical systems can easily be realized since the orbit spends a smaller fraction of the time along the unstable manifold. As a result, noise not only induces synchronization between the oscillators, but can also enhances temporal coherence of the dynamics [36]. This is shown in Fig. 4 for a model laser system for which both theory and experiment are possible. Noise-enhanced coherence can improve the response and synchronization to a periodic external drive [37]. The nontrival effects of added noise have been demonstrated in a chaotic spiking neuronal model [38] in addition to the homoclinic chaotic CO2 laser [36, 37]. In weakly coupled chaotic dynamical systems (namely when the coupling alone is itself not strong enough to induce signiﬁcant synchronization) external noise may enhance synchronization. For example, in two coupled nonidentical chaotic oscillators, the phases of the oscillators can be correlated, but this phase-locking is disrupted when the chaotic trajectories approach unstable periodic orbits that have very different periods. In this case, a suitable amount of noise may prevent the systems approaching such “unlocking” orbits. In this manner, phase slips can be avoided, effectively enhancing synchronization (see Fig. 5). Such a noise-induced effect has been shown in both numerical simulations of the Rössler oscillators as well as experiments with electrochemical oscillators [39]. In an ensemble of weakly coupled oscillators, correlated noise can generate sig- niﬁcant collective oscillations that are not available just from the coupling alone [40, 41]. Coherence of the collective oscillation is maximal at an intermediate noise level (as in the case of stochastic resonance; see below) depending on the coupling parameters. Similar mechanisms have been shown to operate in causing synchronization in spatially extended systems [42], and indeed noise enhanced col- lective synchronization could have meaningful applications, for instance in har- vesting energy from turbulent oceanic waves using coupled oscillatory electrical generators. Time series of output intensities (arbitrary units) of two laser models x1 (solid lines) and y1 (dotted lines) with identical parameters, a common noise at various intensities and an independent noise (intensity D1 = 0.0005 ∼ intrinsic noise level). Note that that the spiking interval becomes shorter and more regular, and at the same time, the two lasers obtain synchronization in the pres- ence of a sufﬁcient amount of common noise. Left panel: model system, right panel: experiment. From [37] An alternate viewpoint considers noise-induced synchrony as a manifestation of generalized synchronization between the oscillators and the noise [43]. Recall that a response system, say with variables Y, is termed in generalized synchrony with a drive (with variables X) when the dynamics of the response is a unique function of the drive, namely Y = (cid:11)(X). (7) It is not clear how far this holds when the drive itself is a stochastic variable, especially since the phenomenon persists when there is both common as well as independent noise, as was demonstrated recently in a study of an ensemble of uncou- pled oscillators subject to both forms of noise [44]. The dynamics of each oscillator is given by Stochastic Synchronization 185 (a) 0 φ Δ −50 −100 −150 0 ε = 0.0205 (b) 104 103 > τ < 102 D = 0.1 D = 0.3 D = 0 ε = 0.0205 ε = 0.0200 ε = 0.0195 ε = 0.0190 25000 time 50000 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 noise intensity D Fig. 5 Noise-enhanced phase locking in two weakly coupled Rössler chaotic oscillators. (a) Phase difference vs. time for different noise intensity D. (b) Average duration of phase-locking epochs vs. D for different coupling strength (cid:14). The standard deviation is shown with error bars for coupling (cid:14) = 0.0205. From [38] ˙Xi= F(Xi) + (cid:14)G(Xi)ξ (t) + σ H(Xi)ηi(t), (8) and it was shown that irrespective of details of the dynamics, for sufﬁciently weak noise, synchronization and phase coherence always results. Noise-induced synchronization has features of similarity with the general phe- nomenon of stochastic resonance (SR) [45], the ampliﬁcation of weak signals due to noise. SR, ﬁrst described by Benzi, Sutera and Vulpiani [46] has been invoked in a number of studies of systems subject to noise. A linear response theory is adequate in its analysis, for the case of weak noise, and when the dynamics of the system can be modeled by two states, with noise induced switching between them, then SR has also been described as a stochastic synchronization of the switching with the noise- indeed, as a phase coherence that is increased as a consequence of noise [45]. 4 The Emergence of Synchrony in Stochastic Systems When considering the dynamics of microscopic systems, the nature of ﬂuctuations may be large enough to preclude a purely deterministic description of the phenom- ena. Examples can be drawn from a number of ﬁelds, in particular from biology: cellular or subcellular processes typically involve a small number of molecules interacting in a ﬁnite volume. Indeed, a stochastic formulation of chemical kinetics has been developed since the 1950s [47]. A detailed consideration of ﬂuctuations is germane when dealing with conﬁned geometries of any kind- biological cells or nanoscale reactors. On this scale, the variation of dynamical quantities is governed by stochastic evolution, and the system is properly described through the master equation formalism [48]. In the typical case one may consider a set of variables X1, X2, . . . , XN that undergo M possible “reactions”. 186 R. Ramaswamy et al. Xi + Xj + · · · kμ→ Xα + Xβ + . . . , μ = 1, . . . , M. (9) Depending on the process at hand, the variables Xi can correspond to actual molecular species, or can be deﬁned more generally. The kμ’s are the rates of the different channels, and the instantaneous conﬁguration of the system, C is deﬁned by specifying the values of the different variables, namely X1, X2, . . . , XN. Denoting the conﬁgurational probability at time t by P(C;t), the evolution of the system is governed by the master equation dP(C, t) dt = − (cid:3) C(cid:18) P(C, t)WC→C(cid:18) + (cid:3) C P(C(cid:18) , t)WC(cid:18)→C (10) where the W’s are transition probabilities depending on the stochastic processes that are possible [48]. Solving the master equation gives a speciﬁc trajectory in the phase space of the problem, but since the system is stochastic, any particular realization starting from some C0 will only give a probabilistic description of the system as it travels through the phase space. Although solving the master equation is typically very difﬁcult, for speciﬁc systems both analysis and Monte Carlo simulations can be carried out [49, 50]. In the limit of large volumes and large numbers of the different species, it can be shown rigorously that the above master equation reduces to the usual mass-action kinetics laws, with additional noise terms that inversely depend on the system volume. This gives the so-called chemical Langevin equation [51], a set of coupled stochastic differential equations of the general form dXi(t) dt = M(cid:3) j=1 sjiaj(X(t)) + M(cid:3) j=1 sjiaj(X((t))1/2γj(t) (11) where the γj(t)’s are statistically independent uncorrelated Gaussian white noise while the sij are stoichiometric factors particular to the reaction channels at hand, with aj’s being related to the “reaction” propensities [49]. When the noise can be ignored completely, this reduces to the usual mass-action kinetic equations, dXi(t) dt = M(cid:3) j=1 sjiaj(X(t)),i = 1, . . . , N. (12) However, it is in the limit of small systems that stochasticity plays a major role, and thus the dynamical evolution via Eq. (10) is relevant. Given two such simi- lar noninteracting stochastic systems, their dynamics will be totally uncorrelated. However, a number of coupling strategies that bring about stochastic synchrony between the two have been discussed in the recent literature [52]. For convenience if the variables of the two systems are indicated with and without primes, then the conﬁgurations are C ≡ (X1, X2, · · · , XN) and C(cid:18) ≡ respectively. (cid:5) 1, X(cid:18) X(cid:18) 2, · · · , X(cid:18) (cid:6) N Stochastic Synchronization 187 1. When directly coupled the two systems have a variable in common, say Xi ≡ X(cid:18)

i. Then the dynamics of the remaining variables Xj and X(cid:18) j (for all j) become essentially identical. It can be shown that in the limit of large volumes when the master equation reduces to the corresponding mass-action kinetic laws, namely a set of deterministic coupled differential equations, this becomes similar to the master-slave coupling discussed by Pecora and Caroll [2]. 2. In exchange coupling, the two systems are linked by the additional stochastic processes, c→ X (cid:18) i c(cid:18) → Xi Xi (cid:18) X i (13) (14) where c and c(cid:18) are the respective transition rates. Synchronization in the other variables, namely between Xj and X(cid:18) j (for all j) occurs when the rates c and c(cid:18) are sufﬁciently large. In the large volume limit, this essentially corresponds to bidirectional diffusive coupling. 3. Global or mean-ﬁeld coupling is another effective strategy to couple two or more similar systems through a common variable. This provides a “mean-ﬁeld” through which the different systems communicate, causing the remaining vari- ables to exhibit synchrony [53, 54]. While these are not the only means through which stochastic systems can syn- chronize, a number of recent studies have discussed applications that exploit one or the other of the above. In the remainder of this section we discuss some representa- tive cases. A simple example is afforded by the coupling of two chemical oscillators [52]. The Brusselator [55] is the set of reactions A1 A2 + X 2X + Y X c1→ X c2→ Y + A3 c3→ 3X c4→ A4. (15) and for appropriate choices of the elementary rates, the ci’s, the dynamics of the variables X and Y in the above system is on a noisy limit-cycle [49]. Consider two such Brusselators (with primed and unprimed variables distin- guishing them). In the case of direct coupling X ≡ X(cid:18), namely the species X is common to both subsystems. With exchange coupling, as indicated above there is an additional channel, (cid:18) c→ X X (cid:18) c(cid:18) → X X (16) (17) 188 R. Ramaswamy et al. Fig. 6 Phase synchrony in directly coupled Brusselators. There is 10% mismatch in the reaction constants c2 = 50 and c(cid:18) = 16 × 5,000, 2 c3 = c(cid:18) 3 = c2 + 5, and the other parameters are c1 = c(cid:18) 1 = 0.00005 and c4 = c(cid:18) 4 = 16 × 5. Adapted from [52] through which the subsystems communicate. As has been shown [52] for coupled Brusselators or for more complex genetic oscillators (that are appropriate models for actual circadian oscillators [56, 57]) with either form of the coupling scheme, the variables Y and Y (cid:18) will phase synchronise even for a high level of parameter mismatch. Shown in Fig. 6 is a representative case of phase synchrony: although the volumes of the coupled systems are quite different and the ﬂuctuations are large, the variables of the two systems are highly correlated in their variation although the amplitudes clearly differ considerably. Exchange coupling is effective only above a threshold exchange rate, namely for sufﬁciently large c and c(cid:18) in Eq. (16) and (17). Thus if one examines the phase difference, (cid:31)φ between the two coupled oscillators, this should become zero only above a critical value of the coupling. Shown in Fig. 7 are results for the above system, showing that for low coupling the phase difference between the systems drifts, becoming zero only for large c. Indeed, such an effect had been noted in an earlier simulation of such systems using the chemical Langevin equations [58, 51]. Mean-ﬁeld coupling has been extensively examined in a related setting [59]. A biological phenomenon that essentially uses such a mean-ﬁeld is quorum sensing, namely the (concentration-dependent) activation of speciﬁc genetic switches by sig- naling molecules that are themselves produced by other genes. Early studies that suggested that such forms of coupling could give rise to synchrony included a study of globally coupled repressilators [60], a model regulatory network with a quorum- sensing module [61], as well as a more abstract circadian model pertaining to the multinuclear organism Neurospora crassa [54]. In this model, one of the species is the cytosolic clock gene mRNA denoted M and a clock protein denoted PC. The nuclear proteins are denoted P(i) N the superscript indicating which cell it is from. The dynamics of the individual nuclear genetic oscillators are synchronized as a consequence of terms of the form Stochastic Synchronization 189 φ Δ 600 500 400 300 200 100 0 0 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1 > ω Δ < c = 0.01 0 0 0.1 0.2 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.3 c c = 0.1 c = 0.6 200 400 600 800 1000 t Fig. 7 The drift of the phase difference between two exchange-coupled Brusselators. The inset shows the variation of the slope as a function of the coupling strength, namely the exchange reac- tion rate c = c(cid:18). Adapted from [52] dPC dt ∼ F(M, PC) + k N(cid:3) i=1 P(i) N (18) in the evolution equations, where N is the number of nuclei, F contains the func- tional dependence particular to this model, and k is the coupling of the mean ﬁeld provided by the nuclear proteins [54]. A more speciﬁc model of such coupling is via the process of quorum sensing, effected in a scheme (see Fig. 8) elaborated by Zhou, Chen and Aihara [61] who showed that extracellular noise common to all cells can effectively induce collective dynamics and stochastic synchronization. Fig. 8 Cellular communication is provided by the diffusing AI dimers in the extracellular environ- ment; AI is synthesized by the protein LuxI, production of which is inhibited by the AI2 − LuxR2 tetramer which is itself formed from the AI dimer and the LuxR dimer. (Courtesy of the authors [61]) 190 R. Ramaswamy et al. 5 Discussion and Summary In this chapter we have addressed two aspects of stochastic synchronization. The ﬁrst is to do with the inducement of synchrony by stochasticity, namely the manner in which systems can exploit the ordering effects of noise so as to achieve syn- chronous dynamics. This is of relevance in a variety of biological settings where the synchronization of systems can arise through their being subject to a common noise or other external perturbations [62]. As has often been pointed out, in ecology, the environment can play a great role in bringing synchrony to different populations over large geographical regions. Experiments have been carried out, particularly in neuronal systems, and show that this is particularly important for information processing since a group of neurons can respond collectively to common synaptic events. A second focus has been on the synchronization of systems with intrinsic noise. These studies are again of relevance to biological systems and indeed to any micro- scopic ﬁnite system. Recent applications have been to the study of synchrony in genetic oscillators and other networks, and a particularly interesting recent exper- iment uses these ideas to synchronize chemical oscillators in a nanoscale environ- ments [63]. Synchrony is one the most visible effects of coupling between nonlinear dynam- ical systems [22]. It is also ubiquitous [5], and is a very general means through which temporal organization arises in complex systems [64]. Its persistence—or enhancement—in the presence of both internal and external noise is thus of impor- tance both from fundamental as well as applications points of view.

We present an experimental set-up that allows to study both controlled and uncontrolled synchronization between a variety of different type of oscillators. The setup consists of two fully actuated mass-damper-spring oscillators mounted on an actuated platform. By means of different types of feedback realized through computer controlled actuation it is possible to demonstrate different synchroniza- tion phenomena, i.e. synchronization of pendula, synchronization of Dufﬁng oscil- lators, synchronization of rotating bodies, etc. Two experiments are presented where uncontrolled synchronization between two types of identical oscillators is investi- gated. First, uncontrolled synchronization between two Dufﬁng oscillators is investi- gated and second, uncontrolled synchronization between two coupled rotating disks is discussed. 1 Introduction In the 17th century the Dutch scientist Christiaan Huygens observed a peculiar phenomenon when two pendula clocks, mounted on a common frame, seemed to “sympathize” as he described it [1]. What he observed was that both clocks adjusted their rhythm towards anti-phase synchronized motion. This effect is now known as frequency or Huygens synchronization and is caused by weak interaction between the clocks due to small displacements of the connecting frame. In [2–5] an extended analysis of this phenomenon is presented. In [6] the authors present an experimental study of Huygens synchronization and ﬁnally, in [7, 8] a study of the uncontrolled as well as the controlled Huygens experiment is presented. Many more cases of synchronization have been identiﬁed in nature and tech- nology around us [9, 10]. Two striking examples in biology are the synchronized ﬂashing of ﬁreﬂies [11] or synchronization of neurons in the brain when performing perceptual tasks. Other examples of synchronization can be found in [12, 13]. Using synchronization it is possible to stabilize the frequency of a high power generators and there are more other applications we are unable to mention in this paper. Three centuries after Huygens the phenomenon of synchronizing driven pendula is, to our best knowledge, repeated twice experimentally. In the ﬁrst research by Bennett, Schatz, Rockwood and Wiesenfeld [2], one has tried to accurately repro- duce the ﬁndings of Huygens in an experimental setup consisting of two pendu- lum clocks attached to a free moving cart. The results of this experiment conﬁrm the documented observations of Huygens. A rather simple but interesting experi- ment is described by Pantaleone [3], where the synchronization of two metronomes is discussed, which are coupled by a wooden board rolling on soda cans. The metronomes in this setup would synchronize most of the time with in phase oscillations. In this paper we present an experimental set-up [4] that allows to study both controlled and uncontrolled synchronization between a variety of different oscil- lators. In Sects. 2 and 3 we outline the goal of the experimental set-up based on our previous experiments. In Sect. 4 the set-up is introduced and we present the dynamical properties of the system. Furthermore, we present the means by which we are able to modify these properties to represent a variety of different oscillators. Next, in Sect. 5, we present an experiment of the synchronization of two Dufﬁng oscillators. We analyze the stability of the synchronization manifold and continue with numerical and experimental results. Section 6 presents an experiment where the set-up is adjusted to behave like two rotating eccentric discs which are coupled through a third disc mounted on a common axis. Conclusions and future research are presented in Sect. 7. 2 Synchronization of Pendulum Clocks Before giving the description of a new experimental set-up we brieﬂy outline exper- imental studies performed on a simple set-up that consists of two metronomes located on a common beam. Analysis of those experiments motivated us to develop a new set-up that will be described in the subsequent sections. The experimental setup consists of two metronomes coupled by a platform which can translate horizontally. The metronomes are made by Wittner, type Maelzel (series 845). The platform is suspended by leaf springs, which allows a frictionless horizontal translation. A pho- tograph of the experimental setup is given in Fig. 1. Several experiments are performed in order to gain experience with the dynamics of the system. Parameters which can be varied in the experiment are the mass of the platform, the mass and frequency of the metronomes and the amount of damping in the system. With different parameters the experiments show different phenomena: anti- phase synchronization (see Fig. 2), an intermediate (neither anti- nor in-phase Experimental Huygens Synchronization of Oscillators 197 Fig. 1 Photograph of the setup synchronization) regime with a large amplitude difference of the angles of the metronomes and ﬁnally in-phase synchronization (see Fig. 3), for details, see [6]. Though it was possible to demonstrate different synchronization regimes with such a relatively simple set-up, the experiments revealed difﬁculties that are unavoid- able for this set-up. First of all, the experiments showed that the results depend heavily on the escapement mechanism used in the metronomes. This mechanism forces pendulums to oscillate and behave like pendulum clocks. Those mechanisms are relatively difﬁcult to model and their parameters vary for different metronomes causing non-identical synchronization. To change the damping parameter the leaf springs should be replaced and hence the whole set-up should be mechanically rebuilt that resulted in that some experiments are quite difﬁcult to repeat with the same results. Moreover, the set-up allows to perform experiments with only one type of oscillators—pendulums, while Huygens’ synchronization can be observed for different types of oscillators, not necessarily pendulums. Analyzing these problems it was proposed to design and to build a new synchronization set-up that would be free of those disadvantages. Fig. 2 Anti-phase synchronization. Difference of phases of the oscillators versus time 198 Fig. 3 In-phase synchronization. Difference of phases of the oscillators versus time A. Pogromsky et al. 3 The Goal of the Experimental Set-Up Starting from the work of Huygens synchronization phenomena attracted attention of many researchers due to its numerous applications, see e.g. [9, 12, 13]. It turns out that the synchronous behavior can be observed in many practical situations and it demonstrates a certain degree of robustness, that is certain approximate synchro- nization can happen even if the synchronizing oscillators are not identical. More- over, understanding of this phenomenon is far from being complete. For example, Christian Huygens observed synchronous behavior of pendulum clocks attached to a common support beam—this effect can be explain by modeling the beam as a one-degree of freedom solid body as is the case in the simple set-up of the previous section, while, to our best knowledge, no attempt was made to analyze this situa- tion taking into account the beam ﬂexibility, reported by Huygens. To discover new aspects of the synchronization phenomenon it would be useful not only to focus on mathematical models and/or computer simulation but also to perform practical experiments to validate the theoretical ﬁndings. Moreover, the experiments can also indicate new and interesting directions for theoretical analysis. Since the synchro- nization can be observed in a variety of different systems it is interesting to have an experimental set-up that can be used to observe and analyze the synchronous behavior for rather different systems. This set-up is useful for both educational and research purposes. To meet this objective it was decided to design an electro-mechanical set-up in such a way that its mechanical counterpart is capable to model common features of the synchronizing systems – two one-degree of freedom oscillators mounted on a one-degree of freedom common support body (beam, or platform), while by actuating the oscillators and the beam via computer-controlled feedback it would be possible to mimic a variety of different controlled/uncontrolled synchronizing Experimental Huygens Synchronization of Oscillators 199 systems. To this end, the mechanical part was designed as linear as possible, while all the nonlinearities necessary to observe the synchronization are implemented by the electrical part of the set-up. Such a design allows to perform numerous experi- ments on different systems with limited implementation costs. The main objectives of the experimental studies are • To observe experimentally synchronous behavior in a variety of different mechan- ical systems • To analyze robustness of the synchronization in a real environment • To ﬁnd common features of the synchronizing systems on the uniform experi- mental platform 4 The Experimental Set-Up In order to experimentally study synchronization between coupled oscillators a set- up consisting of two oscillators, mounted on a common frame has been developed (see Figs. 4 and 5). The parameters of primary interest are presented in Table 1. The set-up contains three actuators and position sensors covering all degrees of freedom. Fig. 4 Photograph of the set-up x3 k3 ß3 F3 x1 m k1 ß1 F1 x2 m k2 ß2 F2 M Fig. 5 Schematic representation of the set-up 200 Table 1 Parameters in experimental set-up A. Pogromsky et al. Oscillator 1 Oscillator 2 Frame/beam m Mass κ1( · ) Stiffness Damping β1( · ) m κ2( · ) β2( · ) M κ3( · ) β3( · ) Furthermore, although the masses of the oscillators (m) are ﬁxed, the mass of the connecting beam (M) may be varied by a factor 10. This allows for mechanical adjustment of the coupling strength. A schematic representation of the set-up is depicted in Fig. 5 and the equations of motion of the (ideal) system are: m¨x1 = −κ1(x1 − x3) − β1(˙x1 − ˙x3) + F1 m¨x2 = −κ2(x2 − x3) − β2(˙x2 − ˙x3) + F2 M¨x3 = κ1(x1 − x3) + κ2(x2 − x3) −κ3(x3) + β1(˙x1 − ˙x3) + β2(˙x2 − ˙x3) − β3(˙x3) +F3 − F1 − F2, (1) (2) (3) where m, M ∈ R>0 and xi ∈ R, i = 1,2,3 are the masses and displacements of the oscillators and the beam respectively. The functions κi:R (cid:3)→ R, βi : R (cid:3)→ R describe the stiffness and damping characteristics present in the system. Fi are the electric actuator forces that may be determined such that the experimental set-up models a large variety of different dynamical systems (see Sect. 4.1). The stiffness and damping in the real system are found to be very well approxi- mated by: κi(qi) = 5(cid:3) kijqj j=1 βi(˙qi) = bi ˙qi, (4) (5) where q1 = x1 − x3, q2 = x2 − x3 and q3 = x3. The values of kij and bi ∀ i = 1,2,3 have been experimentally obtained and will be used to modify the systems’ properties in the sequel. 4.1 Adjustment of the System Properties In order to experiment with different types of oscillators, the derived properties (stiffness and damping) are adjusted. Note that, since we know the damping and stiffness present in the system and since we can fully measure the state of the sys- tem, we may adjust these properties, using actuators, to represent any dynamics we want. This allows modeling of different types of springs (linear, cubic) and any other desired effect within the limits of the hardware. In the next part of this paper we present two examples of this type of modulation. The system is ﬁrst adapted Experimental Huygens Synchronization of Oscillators 201 to analyze synchronization between Dufﬁng oscillators and secondly to analyze the synchronizing dynamics of two coupled rotating eccentric discs under the inﬂuence of gravity. 5 Example 1: Coupled Dufﬁng Oscillators In this section experimental results with respect to two synchronizing Dufﬁng oscil- lators are presented. After introducing the dynamical system analysis of the limit- ing behaviour of the system is presented. Finally, both numerical and experimental results are presented and discussed. 5.1 Problem Statement and Analysis Consider the system as depicted in Fig. 6, where κd(qi) m = ω2 0qi + ϑq3 i (6) where qi = xi − x3 and constants ω0, ϑ ∈ R>0. The system under consideration represents two undriven, undamped Dufﬁng oscillators coupled through a third common mass. The set-up depicted in Fig. 5 can be adjusted to model this system by deﬁning the actuator forces as: Fi = κi(qi) + βi(˙qi) − κd(qi), i = 1,2 F3 = 0 (7) (8) Where F3 = 0 is chosen because, in the original set-up, the beam already models the situation as depicted in Fig. 6 (linear stiffness and damping) fairly accurately. The equations of motion of the resulting system are linear: x3 k3 b x1 x2 kd m kd m M Fig. 6 Schematic representation of the set-up modeling two coupled Dufﬁng oscillators 202 A. Pogromsky et al. m¨x1 = −κd(x1 − x3) m¨x2 = −κd(x2 − x3) M¨x3 = κd(x1 − x3) + κd(x2 − x3) − kx3 − b˙x3, (9) (10) (11) where k,b ∈ R>0 are the stiffness and damping coefﬁcients of the beam. Before continuing with the experimental and numerical results the system’s limit- ing behaviour is analyzed. In order to do so the notion of anti-phase synchronization needs to be deﬁned. We call the solutions of x1(t) and x2(t) asymptotically synchro- nized in anti-phase if they satisfy the following ralation lim t→∞ ||x1(t) − ασ(cid:5) (cid:6)x2(t)|| = 0, T 2 (12) with α a scale factor and σ(cid:5) Respectively, if instead of the previous relation it follows that (cid:6) a shift operator over half an oscillation period (T). T 2 lim sup t→∞ ||x1(t) − ασ(cid:5) (cid:6)x2(t)|| ≤ ε, T 2 (13) for some small ε > 0, we say that the solutions are approximately asymptotically synchronized in anti-phase. It can been shown that the dynamics of the oscillators in (9), (10) and (11) con- verges to anti-phase synchronization as t → ∞. To prove this claim consider the system (9), (10) and (11). To analyze the limit behaviour of this system, the total energy is proposed as a candidate Lyapunov function: V = 1 2 3(cid:3) i=1 mi ˙x2 i + ξi(cid:17) 3(cid:3) i=1 0 κi(s) ds, (14) where m1 = m2 = m, m3 = M, ξi = xi − x3, i = 1,2, ξ3 = x3, κi(qi) = κd(qi) and κ3 = kx3. Calculating the time derivative of V along the solutions of the system (9), (10) and (11) yields: ˙V = −b˙x2 3. (15) Hence, we ﬁnd ˙V ≤ 0 and the system may be analyzed using LaSalle’s invariance principle. Equation (15) implies that V is a bounded function of time. Moreover, xi(t) is a bounded function of time and will converge to a limit set where ˙V = 0. On this limit set ˙x3 = ¨x3 = 0, according to (15). Substituting this in system (9), (10) and (11) yields x3 = 0 on the system limit set. Substituting x3 = ˙x3 = ¨x3 = 0 in (11) shows: κd(x1) = −κd(x2) (16) Experimental Huygens Synchronization of Oscillators Since κd is a one-to-one, odd function, this implies: x1 = −x2 Finally, substituting x1 = −x2 in (9) and (10) yields: ˙x2 = −˙x1. 203 (17) (18) Summarizing, it has been shown that any solution of (9), (10) and (11) will converge to anti-phase synchronized motion according to deﬁnition the given deﬁnition. The next paragraph will present numerical and experimental results that support the analysis provided in this section. 5.2 Experimental and Numerical Results In order to experimentally investigate the synchronizing behaviour of two coupled Dufﬁng oscillators the set-up has been modiﬁed as speciﬁed in the previous sec- tion. The oscillators are released from an initial displacement of −3 and −2.5 mm respectively (approximately in phase) and allowed to oscillate freely. Figure 7 shows the sum of the positions of the oscillators and the position of the beam versus time. As becomes clear from Fig. 7, approximate anti-phase syn- chronization occurs within 40 s. Furthermore, Fig. 8 shows the limiting behaviour of both oscillators and the beam. Although the amplitudes of the oscillators dif- fer signiﬁcantly, the steady state phase difference is 1.01π . The most probable cause for the amplitude difference is the fact that the oscillators are not exactly identical. As a result, the beam does not come to a complete standstill, although it oscillates with an amplitude that is roughly ten times smaller than that of the oscillators. In addition to the experimental results, numerical results are provided in Figs. 9 and 10. The parameters in the simulation are chosen as shown in Table 2. The results presented in Figs. 9 and 10 correspond to the experimental results provided in Figs. 7 and 8 respectively. Although the oscillation frequencies of the oscillators are almost equal (within 5%) in the simulation and the experiment, the ﬁnal amplitudes of the oscillators differs by a factor 15. This is due to the fact that in the experiment the damping is over-compensated, resulting in larger amplitudes of the oscillators. In the numerical simulation almost exact anti-phase synchronization with equal oscillator amplitudes is achieved. Finally, note that some of the differences between the experimental and simu- lation results may be coped with by tuning either the parameters of the numerical simulation or those of the set-up itself. The question of identifying a model can thus be reversed to tuning the parameters of the set-up rather than those of the model. A. Pogromsky et al. 20 25 30 35 40 45 204 5 4 3 2 1 ] m m [ | 2 x + 1 x | 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0 ] m m [ 3 x −0.2 −0.4 20 25 30 35 t [s] 40 45 Fig. 7 Experimental results: (top) Sum of the displacements of both oscillators. (bottom) Displace- ment of the connecting beam ] m m [ i x 1 0.5 0 −0.5 −1 ] m m [ 3 x 0.06 0.04 0.02 0 −0.02 −0.04 −0.06 45 45.2 45.4 45.6 45.8 46 46.2 46.4 46.6 46.8 45 45.2 45.4 45.6 45.8 46.2 46.4 46.6 46.8 46 t [s] Fig. 8 Experimental results: Steady state behaviour of the system. Top: Displacement of the oscil- lators ( − x1, − x2). Bottom: Displacement of the connecting beam Experimental Huygens Synchronization of Oscillators 205 ] m m [ | 2 x + 1 x | 15 10 5 0 0 1 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 ] m m [ 3 x 0.5 0 −0.5 −1 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 t [s] Fig. 9 Numerical Displacement of the connecting beam results: (Top) Sum of the displacements of both oscillators. Bottom: 0.05 0 ] m m [ | i x 45 45.2 45.4 45.6 45.8 46 46.2 46.4 46.6 46.8 47 −0.05 0.05 ] m m [ 3 x 0 −0.05 45 45.2 45.4 45.6 45.8 46 t  [s] 46.2 46.4 46.6 46.8 47 Fig. 10 Numerical results: Steady state behaviour of the system. Top: Displacement of the oscilla- tors ( − x1, − x2). Bottom: Displacement of the connecting beam 206 Table 2 Parameters in numerical simulation A. Pogromsky et al. ωo = 15.26 ϑ = 8.14 M = 0.8 k = 1 m = 1 b = 5 6 Example 2: Two Coupled Rotary Disks Next to the synchronization of Dufﬁng oscillators we investigated synchronization in a system of coupled rotating discs as depicted in Fig. 11. First the dynamics of the system will be speciﬁed in more detail and next experimental results will be presented. g θ 3 k 2 3 M θ 2 3 m θ 1 1 m k k3 b Fig. 11 Schematic representation of the set-up modeling two coupled rotating elements 6.1 Problem Statement Consider the system as depicted in Fig. 11. This system consists of three discs. Discs 1, 2 represent the oscillators and disc 3 is connected to both other discs by torsion springs with stiffness k. Each of the discs has an eccentric mass at a distance (cid:15)i from it’s center ((cid:15)1 = (cid:15)2 = (cid:15)). Furthermore the middle disc is coupled to the world by a torsion spring with stiffness k3 and a torsion damper with constant b. The rotation of the discs is represented w.r.t. the world by the angles θi. The equations of motion of the system depicted in ﬁgure 11 are: ¨θi = −ϑi (k (θi − θ3) + δi sin θi) , i = 1,2 ⎛ ¨θ3 = ϑ3 2(cid:3) ⎝ (cid:6) (cid:5) θj − θ3 k j=1 −k3θ3 − b3 ˙θ3 − δ3 sin θ3 (cid:6) , (19) (20) with ϑi = and δi = mig(cid:15)i. The modiﬁcation to the set-up is now more involved than in the previous example. First of all, the translation coordinates xi 1 +Ji m(cid:15)2 i Experimental Huygens Synchronization of Oscillators 207 should be mapped to rotation angles θi. Secondly, in case of the Dufﬁng oscillator the actuation forces F1 and F2 are meant to act on both the oscillators and the con- necting mass. In the situation depicted in Fig. 11 the actuation force generated to model the coupling between the oscillator discs and the middle disc by means of the torsion spring should again act on the oscillators and the connecting beam in our set-up. However, the part of the actuation force that models the inﬂuence of gravity on the oscillators should only act on the oscillators and not on the connecting beam, since in Fig. 11 the gravity on discs 1 and 2 exerts a force only on the corresponding disc and not directly on the middle mass. In order to adjust the set-up in Fig. 5 to model the system in Fig. 11 the actuator forces are deﬁned as: Fi = κi(qi) + βi(˙qi) − ϑi (ηi + gi) ,i = 1,2 F3 = κ3(x3) − ϑ3 (η3 + g3) − ˜g( · ), (21) (22) 2(cid:18) j=1 with κi(qi) and βi(˙qi) as deﬁned (4,5), ηi = k (θi − θ3) , i = 1,2, gi = δi sin θi and ϑigi. Damping is left to be the natural damping of the beam in the set-up. ˜g = Furthermore, translation is mapped to rotation angles according to: θi = π , with 2 x$ i is the maximal displacement of the oscillators and the beam, assuring ± 90◦ turns in the rotation space. xi x$ i ] ° [ | 2 θ + 1 θ | ] ° [ 3 θ 140 120 100 80 60 40 20 30 20 10 0 −10 −20 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 0 10 20 30 40 t [s] 50 60 70 Fig. 12 Experimental results: (Top) Sum of the rotation angles of the outer discs. Bottom: Rotation angle of the connecting disc A. Pogromsky et al. 78 78.2 78.4 78.6 78.8 79 79.2 79.4 79.6 79.8 208 ] ° [ 2 θ ] ° [ 3 θ 8 6 4 2 0 −2 −4 −6 1.4 1.2 1 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 78 78.2 78.4 78.6 78.8 79 79.2 79.4 79.6 79.8 t [s] Fig. 13 Experimental results: Steady state behaviour of the system. Top: Outer discs ( − θ1, − θ2). Bottom: Connecting disc 6.2 Experimental Results Experimental results, are presented in Figs. 12 and 13. It becomes clear that approxi- mate anti-phase synchronization occurs after about 20 s, like in the Huygens’ pendu- lum set-up. Again complete synchronization does not occur because the oscillators are not identical. In addition Fig. 13 shows the steady state behaviour of the rotating system, from which the approximate anti-phase synchronized behaviour becomes immediately clear. 7 Conclusions We presented a set-up capable of conducting synchronization experiments with a variety of different oscillators. Two sets of experimental results were provided that show the potential of this set-up. First we modeled and experimentally obtained synchronization between two coupled Dufﬁng oscillators. Second, we showed that it is possible to model systems with rotating dynamics and to effectively model the local inﬂuence of gravity in this case. In addition to studying uncontrolled synchronization the set-up has the potential to study controlled synchronization. Furthermore, we aim to model the Huygens Experimental Huygens Synchronization of Oscillators 209 set-up and perform controlled and uncontrolled synchronization experiments with this type of dynamical system.

Abstract In this chapter we review the development of the control of chaos theory subsequent to the seminal paper by Ott, Grebogi and Yorke in 1990. After summa- rizing the main characteristics of the OGY method, we analyze and discuss various applications in several ﬁelds of mechanics. We then illustrate the main aspects of an alternative control method which aims at controlling the overall system dynamics instead of stabilizing a single periodic orbit, as the OGY method does. The two methods are both based on the modern idea of exploiting the chaotic properties of systems, instead of simply eliminating chaos. This paper is one of a collection written in honour of Celso Grebogi, on the occasion of his 60th birthday. So we have thought it appropriate to start with short personal reminiscences by two of the present authors. Some personal remarks by Michael Thompson. Thinking back to my ﬁrst encounters with chaos in the early 1980’s, I remember that the work of “Grebogi, Ott and Yorke” soon became indelibly etched on my mind. Interested by some unexpected subharmonic resonances that had been observed when oil tankers were moored to articulated off-shore towers, I had modelled the system as a driven impact oscillator. This exhibited a lot of fascinating nonlinear phenomena, including what David Rand (at Warwick University) told me were chaotic motions: about which I had to do some very rapid reading! My ﬁrst pub- lication about the chaos in this impacting system [1] appeared in 1982 which was, interestingly, the year of Celso’s ﬁrst major paper on chaos [2]. The latter, authored by Grebogi, Ott and Yorke, was a seminal paper dealing with the bifurcational crises of chaotic attractors: to date it has attracted 483 citations. It became one of my standard references in, for example, my paper on the design of compliant off-shore structures [3].

I next turned my attention to the chaotic phenomena that triggered the escape from a potential well, publishing in 1989 a paper in the Proceedings of the Royal Society [7] which itself has attracted 120 citations. In this work I found it necessary to reference six papers by Celso including [5] described above. A paper of partic- ular signiﬁcance to me, by McDonald et al. [8] (351 cites), was on fractal basin boundaries which I warned could seriously decrease the integrity of engineering systems. From this spectacular start, Celso’s career has gone from strength to strength, and he is now on the distinguished ISI List of Highly Cited Researchers. Meanwhile the writers of the present paper note with special pleasure and satisfaction that the paper entitled Controlling Chaos [9] published by Ott, Grebogi and Yorke in 1990 has been selected by the American Physical Society as one of the milestone pieces of research from the last 50 years. This puts Celso (alongside many Nobel Prize winners) in the list of milestone contributors which has been created by the society to celebrate the 50 years of Physical Review Letters. Not surprisingly, this paper of 1990 is Celso’s most highly referenced work, having been cited 2,711 times. After seeing his early papers in print, I soon enjoyed meeting Celso at many inter- national conferences throughout the world: and now, I am delighted and honoured to be getting to know Celso and his family very well indeed because we both hold Sixth Century Chairs at the University of Aberdeen (his full-time, mine part-time).

Some personal remarks by Giuseppe Rega. I ﬁrst met Celso Grebogi at the IUTAM Symposium on Nonlinearity and Chaos in Engineering Dynamics organized by Michael Thompson at University College London, 1993. Within a top level specialty meeting of scientists from engineering mechanics working on nonlinear dynamics and their applications, Celso was invited, from a different environment, to mark a conscious and widespread transition from the traditional asymptotic/numeric treatment of nonlinear dynamics problems fol- lowed within the community of mechanicians, to a more modern and integrated approach relying additionally on geometric and experimental methods. Celso fully succeeded in his own task, by providing the attendees with a clear feeling of the importance of a dynamical systems approach to nonlinear/chaotic dynamics in engi- neering and by introducing the newly developed concept and technique of chaos control. Since then Celso has become for the engineering community the most appropriate and acclaimed scientist for knowledge transfer from Physics as well as for cross-fertilization between Physics and Engineering. Within his extraordinary number of achievements on cutting edge issues in dynamical systems theory and applications and assuming an engineering mechan- ics scholar’s viewpoint, I just mention two items. (i) All dynamical systems sci- entists from engineering have become familiar with concepts like sudden change bifurcations in chaotic attractors and basin boundary metamorphoses by reading Celso and co-authors’ papers; (ii) the OGY method paved the way for a modern and Controlling Chaos: The OGY and an Alternative Control Method 213 comprehensive notion of control of chaos, including its suppression, enhancement or use, which is of major importance for practical applications. In the last decade, Celso’s interests meaningfully spread to include problems of dissipative dynamics typically occurring in engineering applications. His former interests towards applications of chaos and control to, e.g., plasma and laser sys- tems or communication, evolved to include such typical systems and problems in mechanics as pendula, ship capsizing, impact and dry friction oscillators, ﬂuidized beds, hydrodynamical ﬂows, suspension bridge models, and spacecraft steering. Within the scientiﬁcally fertile and prestigious Maryland group, Celso gave fun- damental contribution as regards both the scientiﬁc aspects and the worldwide pro- motion of knowledge on chaotic dynamics and their applications. His broadminded- ness and capability in cross-disciplinary relationships allowed him to play a role of most visible and internationally recognized scientist by neighbouring scientiﬁc com- munities dealing with complexity. A capability to lead and motivate research groups and disseminate knowledge to companion communities and wider non-specialists’ audiences that were fully conﬁrmed when he moved to the University of Sao Paulo and, more recently, to the University of Aberdeen. 1 Controlling Chaos: A Hot Topic at the Change of the Millennium Among various other research topics which attracted the attention of researchers in the 20 years across the change of the Millennium, control of nonlinear dynamics and chaos is certainly one of the most important and well identiﬁed, developed at lenght from a few seminal ideas and methods, and yet far from being exhausted. The quality of papers published on this topic cannot be judged by numbers or quantitative indicators, and indeed we found, as in other research ﬁelds, both very good – seminal, indeed – and poor works. However, numbers provide an understand- ing on the “impact” of this discipline on the advancement of science, engineering, practice and, more generally, of knowledge. biology, medicine, economics, and various ﬁelds of engineering (see Sect. 3 for more details related to mechanical engineering and structural dynamics). The starting point of the theory and applications of “chaos control” is unani- mously considered to be the work of Ott, Grebogi and Yorke [9]. Actually, other works aimed at “suppressing chaos” in some systems appeared at about the same time or earlier (e.g., [40, 41]), but the seminal idea of exploiting the chaotic behaviour of systems in order to control their dynamics was ﬁrst undoubtedly presented in the OGY paper. It represents a major improvement with respect to other points of view on the matter, independently pursued within different scientiﬁc communities (of mathematicians, physicists and engineers): in fact, it marks the fundamental passage from analysis to synthesis of chaotic properties, just based on the knowledge and exploitation of the dynamical systems theory deeply studied in the past. Since then, control of nonlinear dynamics and chaos – intended in a broad sense – has become a hot trans-disciplinary research topic, as shown not only by the already mentioned great number of scientiﬁc publications but also by its increasing popu- larity within the environment of non-technical chaos connoisseurs. In most of the works on the subject, the 1990 OGY paper is quoted along with some of the articles, aimed at improving and discussing the original idea or pursuing possible relevant applications, successively published by the same group of authors, with further collaborators, or by independent scientists. Without any attempt at com- pleteness, one can mention, e.g., [42–47], in the ﬁrst group, and [48–53] in the second group. Yet, as already said, various underlying notions of chaos control stay in the background of the research activity in the ﬁeld. In line with some ﬁrst attempts, in their papers several authors aim at merely removing chaos, by means of classical control techniques [54], empirical methods [55], or other clever approaches [56]. These works are also referred to as “control of chaos”, although in this matter some authors, and we agree with them, prefer the name “suppression of chaos” (e.g., [36, 57–59]), which focuses on the effects of control rather than on the under- lying skill of the control method. Thus, today, one refers to chaos control both when 1. chaotic transients and/or attractors are eliminated “tout court,” even if the tools employed to eliminate chaos have nothing to do with it, and when 2. typical properties of chaotic dynamics are involved in the control process, irre- spective of the actual tools being employed to control the system and, indeed, of its actual response. This twofold control aspect is already clearly highlighted in Linder and Ditto [36], when they assert that “... some techniques merely suppress or remove chaotic behavior ... others actually exploit chaotic behavior ...”. Within the latter, more general and modern, perspective, the capability to exploit typical properties of dynamical systems undergoing chaotic behaviours in order to control the system response actually refers to either suppressing or enhanc- ing chaos (the so called anti-control of chaos), or even using it, based on the Controlling Chaos: The OGY and an Alternative Control Method 215 speciﬁc goal of the considered technique, on the system at hand, and on the area of interest [38]. Another basic issue is concerned with whether the dynamical phenomenon to be controlled by whatever “chaos control” technique has to be intended as “chaos” in a strict sense or, rather, as any kind of complex behaviour of a dynamical system, which may have different aspects according to whether a theoretical or a practi- cal viewpoint is adopted. In the former, dynamical systems oriented, perspective, one can think of, e.g., any global bifurcational event possibly entailing complex behaviour of the system, of the relevant escape from a safe subset (a potential well or a basin of attraction) in parameter control space, or of the synchronization of different oscillators. In the latter, application-oriented, perspective, the kind and meaning of the “complex” phenomenon of interest is dictated by the practical goal to be attained. In view of this extended notion of chaos control, no relevant exhaustive classi- ﬁcation seems to be yet available, although some earlier interesting attempts have been made. For example, Chen and Dong [10] proposed a classiﬁcation based on various tools employed in the control process (parameter-dependent approaches, open-loop strategies, engineering feedback control, adaptive control, intelligent con- trol, etc.), while Fradkov’s “Chaos Control Bibliography (1997–2000)” [33] also contains a classiﬁcation of the various applications in science and engineering. Recent classiﬁcations basically distinguish between feedback (or close-loop) and non-feedback (or open-loop) control techniques. A more phenomenologically based classiﬁcation relies on the ascertainment of how one can statically or dynamically modify either the system parameters – which represents the most basic form of passive control at the design stage – or the excita- tion, to attain the control goal. In particular, 1. the OGY’s method [9], 2. some classical methods (CM) of control theory [60], 3. the “control by system design” (CSD) [28], 4. the “parametric variation methods” (PVM) [10], aim at somehow modifying the system. Note that also the OGY method could be classiﬁed as a PVM, but it has some speciﬁc features and we prefer to keep it sepa- rate. In turn, methods acting on the excitation include 1. classical methods where a properly modiﬁed input (periodic or aperiodic, open- loop or feedback) is applied to the system (CM) [54, 56, 60, 61]; 2. the “control through operating conditions” (COC) [28] based on modifying the frequency and/or the amplitude of the excitation; 3. the methods based on either combining parametric and external excitations (PEE) [41], or applying weak periodic perturbations (WPP) [17], or modifying the shape of the excitation (SE) [40, 62, 63]. Obviously, different methods are expected to give different performances, at least theoretically. Thus, one has methods aimed at: 216 G. Rega et al. 1. stabilizing an unstable zone of parameter space (CSD, COC, PVM); 2. moving away from (previously known) chaotic zones (CSD, COC); 3. stabilizing a given, erratic solution (CM, OGY); 4. overall regularizing the system dynamics, irrespective of single solution behaviour (PEE, WPP, SE). It is the authors’ opinion that these latter distinctions are very important from a practical point of view because they suggest the use of the most appropriate control method ﬁtting prescribed technical requirements. Focusing the attention on the exploitation of chaotic behavior, there is even another possible classiﬁcation, which seems not pursued in the literature, where various methods can be grouped according to the chaotic properties involved in the control. In this respect, one can distinguish methods based on 1. the properties of the saddles embedded in the chaotic attractor (OGY); 2. the ergodicity of the chaotic attractor (for example, all methods where a prelim- inary targeting step [46, 64, 65] is followed by the application of control tools in the neighborhood of the chosen control area belong to this class); 3. the sensitivity to initial conditions [45]; 4. the occurrence of homo/heteroclinic bifurcations (PEE, WPP, SE). Besides the formulation of different techniques for chaos control, the nearly two decades straddling the change of the Millennium have seen also a large num- ber of relevant applications to mathematical, physical, biological, and engineering systems, within different technical ﬁelds. Of course, no attempt is made herein to comprehensively report on them. In contrast, consistent with one of the goals of this chapter, attention is focused on applications of chaos control in mechanics although, at a ﬁrst sight, they could appear relatively few and of only minor importance. Up to the authors’ knowledge, earlier review papers explicitly devoted to this topic date back to 1993 [28]. The authors report on the newly developed (at that time) OGY method, and propose to control a mechanical system by either changing the forcing characteristics (e.g. the excitation frequency) – with the aim of moving away from a previously known chaotic region – or modifying any system property, such as inertia or stiffness. All of the proposed techniques fall in the area of “sup- pressing” chaos, and while being illustrated with reference to a Dufﬁng oscillator (possibly equipped with also a tuned mass damper), they do not actually refer to speciﬁc issues associated with the mechanical nature of the systems. A recent survey of the application of various methods of chaos control to mechan- ical systems [35] reports quite a long list of mechanical systems or processes for which control of nonlinear dynamics and chaos has been addressed in the literature, furnishing at least one reference for each of them. The list includes pendulums, beams and plates, systems with friction and/or impacts, spacecraft, vibroformers, microcantilevers, ship oscillations, tachometers, rate gyros, Dufﬁng oscillators, robot-manipulator arms, earthquake civil engineering, milling processes, whirling motions under mechanical resonance, and systems with clearance. The items in the list highlight the quite scattered nature of the work in terms of the mechanical Controlling Chaos: The OGY and an Alternative Control Method 217 complexity and variety of the systems, of the involved dynamical processes, and of speciﬁc control goals. Indeed, choosing a proper framework within which to organize, present and dis- cuss the state of art in the ﬁeld is not an easy task because, depending on various application ﬁelds, mechanics is concerned (i) with both discrete (ﬁnite-dimensional) and continuous (inﬁnite-dimensional) dynamical systems, (ii) with their possibly reliable low-dimensional models, and (iii) with a considerable richness of dynam- ical processes and phenomena to be possibly controlled. Though being mechanics mostly concerned with large scale systems traditionally analyzed and designed via linear techniques, a large amount of research made in the last 30 years has high- lighted a cornucopia of nonlinear dynamic phenomena, including chaotic responses, along with their importance in mechanical and structural applications. Yet, regular nonlinear phenomena of such a variety of systems are already quite complicated in themselves, and as such exhibit a major importance in the real world of mechanics. As a matter of fact, the question of how important and pervasive chaotic phenomena are in the behavior of mechanical/structural systems, is still to be answered. Accord- ingly, it is quite difﬁcult to select studies devoted to chaos control in mechanics in a strict sense, whereas the topic has to be intended in the wider sense of control of dynamical complexity, and is often addressed in the literature within the more general area of control of nonlinear, wanted or unwanted, phenomena. On the other hand, the inherent complexity of systems from mechanical science and engineering poses the challenging problem of identifying proper reduced order models able to reliably describe the ensuing rich nonlinear dynamics; an issue which becomes even more demanding if one is interested in dealing with possibly complex nonregular response of the actual system and with its control. This basically entails one major consequence and one question. 1. A large majority of research works on control of chaos in mechanics is concerned with (relatively simple) archetypal nonlinear oscillators often representing ideal- izations of more involved discrete systems encountered in real mechanical engi- neering or minimal discretized representations – according to some reduction technique – of the inﬁnite-dimensional continuous systems typical of structural engineering. This also entails that in most research papers the interest is focused on the control technique – or on other dynamical or control aspects transversal and unifying with respect to other scientiﬁc/technological ﬁelds – rather than on the actual mechanical peculiarities of the considered systems. 2. Even being convinced of the signiﬁcance of nonregular dynamics – and of their control – for real mechanical/structural systems, how representative of their actual behavior are the chaotic regimes highlighted for such reference archetypal oscillators? Of course, this is a general point arising in any modeling and reduc- tion problem, but it is felt to have a special meaning in mechanics owing to the above mentioned inherent complexity of the involved large-scale systems. The only possibility to clarify this issue consists in highlighting the actual occurrence, and the features, of chaotic response in experimental (mechanical and structural) systems, in developing reﬁned theoretical and numerical models of the actual 218 G. Rega et al. system, and in cross-validating the two approaches. In this respect, considerable research is going on to highlight occurrence and features of chaos in experimen- tal and/or reﬁned theoretical models, but relatively little is yet done as regards their control. Altogether, considering such a rich and intriguing framework which encom- passes several aspects, the objective and organization of this chapter can be stated as follows. The major role played by the OGY method in establishing the basic philosophy of chaos control is recognized in Sect. 2, along with its improvements, extensions and applications. The use of OGY method for chaos control in mechanics is systematically addressed in Sect. 3, by identifying distinguishing classes of systems and appli- cations, and by discussing them in the framework both of the capabilities and of some limitations of the method. Then, a substantially alternative technique – according to the previously men- tioned classiﬁcation criteria – is presented in Sect. 4. It consists of an overall procedure for controlling the non-regular dynamics of systems triggered by the occurrence of homoclinic or heteroclinic bifurcations, which is discussed in its generic/non-generic features and with regard to a number of applications to systems of interest in nonlinear structural dynamics and engineering. 2 The Paradigmatic OGY Method for Chaos Control The OGY method was ﬁrst formulated in the celebrated work by Ott et al. [9]. A web-based search on “Scopus” looking back to the year 1998 (i.e., only 10 years back from now, instead of 18) already furnishes more than 2,300 articles citing the original OGY paper, with many of them also citing various other papers con- cerned with the method and published in the following years. In fact, the scien- tiﬁc literature in the area registered the publication of a great number of papers, co-authored either by one of the original authors with collaborators or by other scientists somehow related with the University of Maryland Chaos Group, for the whole decade of the Nineties. These papers provided explanations, clariﬁcations, extensions and improvements on the theoretical and computational aspects of the method, as well as a great number of experimental implementations, applications in a wide variety of technical ﬁelds – ranging from mechanical systems to electronics, laser technology, chemical reactions, heart tissues, communications –, and modiﬁ- cations/reﬁnements aimed at overcoming some observed limitations or drawbacks. The number of papers ensuing from the original one is so large that it makes no sense to list or report on them. A similar reasoning can be done as regards the theoretical and practical aspects of the method, which are somehow summarized in most – if not all – of the articles subsequently published by different authors and concerned with OGY control of chaos. Controlling Chaos: The OGY and an Alternative Control Method 219 Quite soon the method became popular also within the less strictly technical literature, as witnessed by a number of articles appeared, e.g., in Nature [47], Non- linear Science Today [66] and Physics Today [67]. In both the hard and soft science respect, one could even run the risk to somehow compare, though to a lower scale, the paradigmatic role played by the OGY method in the area of control of chaos at the round of the Millennium with the revolutionary role played by chaos in the area of nonlinear science in the second half of the XX century! Based on previous points, no analytical description of how the method works is reported herein. Yet, to the sole purpose of properly frameworking the discussion on the use of OGY control of chaos in mechanics, successively made in Sect. 3, a brief summary of the main qualitative features of the method is provided following the updated – though popular – exposition given in Ott [68]. Two fundamental aspects of chaos are: 1. The exponential sensitivity of orbits to small perturbations. 2. A very complex orbit structure making possible many different motions in the same system at ﬁxed parameter values. Actually, these are not independent properties, but rather two sides of the same “chaos coin”. The ﬁrst property, typically quantiﬁed by the largest Lyapunov expo- nent, refers to the difﬁculty in the prediction of sufﬁciently distant future states of the system, while the second property, most often quantiﬁed by an entropy measure, refers to the fact that chaotic attractors often have embedded within them an inﬁnite, dense set of unstable periodic orbits. While chaos is commonly viewed as undesir- able, these properties can also be of great beneﬁt in certain situations where one wishes to control the system dynamics. In particular, if the system is sufﬁciently well characterized and noise is not too large, then the ﬁrst property implies that relatively large changes in the eventual location of orbit points can be made using only small changes in a control variable, while the second property implies that the dynamical changes so produced may be very diverse, leading to a situation with a great deal of ﬂexibility. The two methods that are useful in utilizing chaos in an effective way are 1. control, namely the feedback stabilization of selected unstable orbits embedded in the attractor, and 2. targeting, namely the rapid steering of a chaotic orbit to the vicinity of a desired point in phase space. Here control means feedback control, i.e., measurements of the state of the sys- tem are regularly taken, and, based on them, some controllable parameter (or set of parameters) is adjusted so as to achieve some goal. The desirable goals may vary, and different types of goals lead to qualitatively different control problems. Apart from those of interest for speciﬁc applications, general goals include: 1. Given a steadily running chaotic system, how can one improve its time averaged performance? Here performance is deﬁned with reference to the speciﬁc function the system is meant to carry out. 220 G. Rega et al. 2. Given a chaotic system in a given state at some speciﬁc time, how can one nudge the subsequent orbit to evolve rapidly from its current state to a different target location in state space ? For the ﬁrst goal, the complex orbit structure is most relevant; for the second goal, exponential sensitivity is most relevant. In all cases, the fundamental attributes of chaos imply that the control goals can be potentially achieved by use of only small controlling perturbations. Thus, one consequence of chaos is that control can be accomplished with low-energy/low-force controllers. In order to see how this might be done, one ﬁrst refers to the inﬁnite number of unstable periodic orbits (UPOs) embedded within typical chaotic attractors. If one had the ability to perfectly place an initial condition on any chosen one of these UPOs, then an inﬁnite number of different types of motion could be achieved. More- over, if no noise were present in the system, such motions would ideally continue indeﬁnitely in time. The performance of a system, in general, depends on its state and its history. Let x(t) denote the system state as a function of time t. Assume that the perfor- mance P of some steadily running process can be given as the time average of some quantity f that is a function of the system state P = (cid:23)f (x(t))(cid:24), where the angle brackets denote a time average. For each UPO, a different state trajectory xi(t) results, where the subscript i labels the particular UPO. Consequently, each unstable periodic orbit i will have associated with it a performance Pi = (cid:23)f (xi(t))(cid:24), and these performance values will typically be different for each i. Moreover, it can be shown that, under suitable conditions, the performance Pc for the chaotic orbit is a weighted average of the performances Pi attained by the periodic orbits. The implication of this is that some of the Pi will be larger than Pc. If the system can be controlled to such a periodic orbit, then the system performance will be improved. The next question is how to control the system so that it follows the chosen UPO rather than the chaotic orbit xc(t). One way of doing this is to wait until the ergodic uncontrolled chaotic orbit xc(t) comes close to the desired UPO, and then give it a small kick to place it on or very near the UPO. Due to several fac- tors (system noise, our inability to kick the orbit to a precise location, an imper- fect knowledge of precisely where the desired orbit lies), the kicked orbit will not be exactly on the desired UPO. Since the UPO is unstable, the system orbit will begin to move away from it. As soon as this is discerned, a small kick can be reapplied to reposition the system orbit closer to the desired UPO. By doing this continually, the orbit can be kept close to the desired UPO indeﬁnitely. Note that for small noise and inaccuracy, the size of the kicks required to maintain the system orbit near the desired UPO is correspondingly small, approaching zero for the noiseless, absolutely accurate case. Thus, in many situations, the goal can be achieved with small controls. In comparison, one should note that in other propor- tional feedback control schemes where the targeted state might not be a part of the intrinsic dynamics, large controlling signals might be needed even if the system is noiseless. Controlling Chaos: The OGY and an Alternative Control Method 221 Two issues that must be considered for such implementations are 1. how to determine and locate UPOs embedded in a chaotic attractor, and 2. how to make the small controlling kicks. Determining UPOs If a very accurate analytical model of the system is available, then standard numerical techniques (e.g., Newton’s method applied to the ﬁxed point equation of the n times iterated map) can be applied to determine UPOs. However, in many cases of experimental interest, an analytical model of the system under study may not be available. In such cases, it is still possible to determine UPOs purely from data by recording the trajectory of a free-running (i.e., uncontrolled) chaotic orbit. The idea is to use state space embedding and attractors reconstruction techniques [69]. Techniques for ﬁnding UPOs from data have been discussed by So et al. [70] and by Pierson and Moss [71], among others. Another issue is how many UPOs on the chaotic attractor need to be determined. Hunt and Ott [72] showed that it is seldom necessary to determine a very large number of UPOs since maximal performances typically occur on low period UPOs, which are limited in number. UPO Controlling Algorithms Having chosen a suitable UPO embedded within the attractor, it remains to specify how the small controls should be programmed to maintain the system orbit on the chosen UPO. Several ideas have been proposed to accomplish this: • The original OGY technique employed in Ott et al. [9] is to use the control to place the orbit on or near the stable manifold of the desired UPO. • Romeiras et al. [73] discuss use of the “pole-placement” technique, which is standard in control theory. • Dressler and Nitsche [74] and So and Ott [75] show how UPO control can be implemented using only time-series measurements of a single scalar state vari- able. • Socolar et al. [76] present a technique particularly useful for the control of very fast dynamics. Targeting refers to the control goal of quickly bringing an orbit to some desired location in state space. The basic idea is that since chaos is exponentially sensitive to small orbit perturbations, such orbit perturbations become large in a relatively short time. Moreover, if the perturbations are very carefully chosen, then there is the hope that the orbit can be efﬁciently directed to the target using only small controls. Several techniques for achieving this goal have been formulated [46, 77–79]. A number of improvements and modiﬁcations of the OGY control, aimed at overcoming some of the associated limitations, will be mentioned in the following section in connection with use of the method, or of any of its many variants, for control of chaos in mechanical systems. It will be shown how the method works well, both numerically and experimentally, for a considerable number of relatively simple systems and models. Yet, one major problem is concerned with the extent of the impact that the method can have for chaos control in real world applications. 222 G. Rega et al. This is linked with the general problem, mentioned in Sect. 1, of how much reliably representative of actual systems behaviour are the nonlinear dynamic phenomena and their control as evidenced for substantially archetypal models: in this sense, all possible limitations, if any, are not to be abscribed to the sole OGY method. 3 Use of OGY Method for Control of Chaos in Mechanics Two features of a chaotic system make it a candidate for OGY control [80]: (i) the presence within the strange attractor of one or more unstable ﬁxed points of the saddle-node type, to be possibly stabilized, and (ii) an accessible system parameter through which an applied control input changes the location of the unstable ﬁxed point in the phase plane, adjusting it in such a way to ensure that the trajectory returns to the vicinity of the original one. In theory, the OGY method is a “black box” technique that can be applied to any system possessing these two attributes, even to experimental systems for which no accurate analytical or numerical model exists. Indeed, it is not necessary to have a mathematical model to achieve the control goal since all control parameters may be resolved from time series analysis with the assistance of delay coordinate embedding techniques [81, 82]. Yet, the method does not seem to work well when a relatively large inﬂuence of noise exists as in usual experimental applications (see [83] for a feedback controlled pendulum), although it has been applied successfully to several experimental models [47]. Also, some features of the method, such as considering a local linear return map in the region around the unstable ﬁxed point to be stabilized and applying small control forces to ensure that the oscillator continually returns to the region of phase space described by such a map, may render the control ineffective or impractical for some sensitive systems. This can occur, e.g., if the true dynamics change too quickly in the region of interest, if the region of linear validity is too small for some unstable ﬁxed points, or if the unstable eigenvalue is so large that points near the ﬁxed point are swept away very quickly and tend not to return to the linear region [84]. Moreover, since control only begins when the trajectory enters for the ﬁrst time the region where the linear map applies, it can happen that for some chaotic systems this may take thousands of cycles, depending on the effect of the control parameter on the estimated location of the perturbed ﬁxed point and on the size of the linear capture region. So, the OGY method, which is locally linear, may not be practical for all chaotic systems. Another issue related to control of chaotic attractors is the existence of a some- times long chaotic transient before the system settles onto the stabilized orbit. This transient arises because time-dependent parameters can only be effectively applied to stabilize an orbit when the system falls within a narrow region around it. For typical initial conditions the system wanders chaotically and since the attractor is ergodic it will eventually fall sufﬁciently close to the ﬁxed point to be stabi- lized. The length of the chaotic transient for randomly chosen initial values has Controlling Chaos: The OGY and an Alternative Control Method 223 an exponential distribution. To reduce the necessary time for stabilizing the tar- get orbit, the OGY method was modiﬁed by Shinbrot et al. [46] (SOGY method) by exploiting the extreme sensitivity of a chaotic attractor to tiny perturbations in initial conditions to rapidly direct a system from a given initial state to a desired one. Overall, this targeting approach provides a way of directing trajec- tories from any initial conditions to the desired ﬁxed point, and is shown to be quite successful. There are other improvements of the OGY method aimed at overcoming some of its original limitations, as for example control of high periodic and high unstable UPO [85, 86] and control using time delay coordinates [74, 75, 87]. In this respect, it is worth mentioning how many of the presently available techniques aiming at controlling chaos by stabilizing UPOs represent some interpretation or extension of the original OGY method. 3.1 The Pendulum System The mathematical pendulum is the archetypal nonlinear oscillator in mechanics. Accordingly, it has been considered for validating chaos control techniques, testing their effectiveness and comparing them. As regards OGY-based control methods, besides several numerical applications, also a number of experimental applications have been concerned with nonlinear pendulums [85, 87–89], as well as a double pendulum [90]. Starrett and Tagg [88] controlled chaos in a pendulum with vertically driven pivot over a range of driving frequencies and damping levels by using two variations on the OGY method, namely by proportional adjustments of damping for ﬁxed time intervals or by proportional time intervals for ﬁxed levels of damping, and with the eddy-current damping as control parameter. Baker [91] studied the control of a chaotic damped driven pendulum (with one external excitation) by using OGY method for stabilizing an UPO through a feed- back mechanism that periodically adjusts the damping parameter of the pendulum. A number of papers/applications used some kind of “OGY-like” methods. For example, based on an optimal control algorithm “belonging to the parameter vari- ation techniques introduced in [9]” and minimizing the distance between a chaotic trajectory and a desired periodic orbit [92], Bishop et al. [93] realized ﬂexible con- trol of tumbling chaos in a parametrically excited pendulum by stabilizing it onto a variety of oscillating or rotating periodic states, located via coupled symbolic- numerical dynamics, by small adjustments of the driving frequency. Several authors compared the capability and efﬁciency of various techniques by referring to the (mathematical) pendulum, with the interest being focused rather on the former than on the latter. Yagasaki and co-workers investigated chaos control for a pendulum subjected to feedforward and feedback control. Yagasaki and Uozumi [89] showed that the chaotic dynamics resulting from transverse intersection between the stable and unstable manifolds can be stabilized to the target saddle-type periodic orbit by 224 G. Rega et al. using OGY and SOGY methods. Since the former method required a very long time for stabilization of the targets and the latter was not effective when model- ing errors existed, Yagasaki and Uozumi [48] developed another approach where nonlinear approximations are used for the chaotic dynamical system and for the stable manifold of the target. It also includes the OGY method as a special case and is no more than just the pole placement technique. Yagasaki and Uozumi [49] applied the method to the pendulum equation with the assistance of the delay coor- dinate embedding techniques [69], proving that the time necessary for stabilization is reduced, whereas Yagasaki and Yamashita [94] obtained a faster stabilization of the considered UPO without using delay coordinate embedding techniques, even when some modeling errors or the inﬂuence of noise exist. Wang and Jing [95] applied the Lyapunov function method to design a controller able to convert the chaotic motion of a pendulum to any periodic orbit in a shorter time than that required by OGY-based methods (much shorter than OGY but also shorter than SOGY) for the same parameter values and initial conditions. In partic- ular, the Lyapunov method is able to overcome a difﬁculty arising when employ- ing even modiﬁed versions of OGY method, which make use of the generalized Poincaré map, for stabilizing higher-periodic orbits, namely the unclearly speciﬁed stability directions – which play a basic role in the control procedure – around a multiple saddle solution. Alasty and Salarieh [96] designed a non-linear feedback controller to stabilize arbitrary desired periodic orbits such as period-one, period-two, period-four orbits and more in a chaotic pendulum, and showed that the major advantage of this method is its shorter chaotic transient time compared with other methods such as

OGY. A variation of the discrete OGY technique called semi-continuous control (SCC) method, proposed by Hübinger et al. [85] and extended by DeKorte et al. [87], was considered by Pereira-Pinto et al. [97] to stabilize unstable periodic orbits – identi- ﬁed by the closed-return method – in a nonlinear pendulum with torsional stiffness and damping. In implementing the control, two different situations were considered, ﬁrst, if either all state variables are available, as it happens when considering signals generated by numerical integration of a mathematical model based on experimen- tally identiﬁed parameters, or, second, just a scalar time series obtained from an experimental setup. In the second situation, state space reconstruction is used with the method of delay coordinates [69]. Of course, experimental data is associated with noise contamination which is unavoidable in cases of data acquisition, so that the effect of noise on control techniques is an important point to be analyzed in order to ascertain their robustness, which is an essential aspect to the controllability of a dynamical system. By analyzing the effect of noise on the controlling procedure the authors deﬁned some relevant limitations. Nonetheless, the possibility of using this approach to control chaotic behavior in mechanical systems was conﬁrmed. Working on the same line, Pereira-Pinto et al. [98] proposed the use of “extended state observers” – which is a tool from control theory for determining non-observed states of a dynamical system – to perform the state space reconstruction from one scalar time series, instead of using the delay coordinate method. Again, they suc- Controlling Chaos: The OGY and an Alternative Control Method 225 cessfully applied this technique in the framework of the semi-continuous control of chaos of the nonlinear pendulum. 3.2 Smooth Archetypal Oscillators Since the very ﬁrst formulation of the OGY method, a number of authors considered some kind of magneto-elastic beam as the archetypal experimental model for control of chaos in smooth mechanics. The practicality of the method to lock a system response onto speciﬁc peri- odic orbits embedded in a chaotic attractor and move it from one periodic orbit to another was ﬁrst demonstrated by Ditto et al. [99] for a chaotically oscillating magneto-elastic ribbon, whose effective Young’s modulus is sensitive to small mag- netic ﬁelds. By providing a time-dependent perturbation to the applied ﬁeld (based on the position of the beam), Ditto et al. could stabilize the ribbon onto period-1 and period-2 orbits. Referring to the classical experimental magneto-mechanical oscillator consisting of a mass attached to a cantilevered elastic beam [100], which exhibits a double-well potential and a two-dimensional Poincaré map, Moon et al. [101] used the “occa- sionally proportional feedback” technique developed by Hunt [102] as an extension of the OGY method to stabilize the system onto a period-one motion. Also stimulated by that classical experiment, Dressler et al. [103] demonstrated the tracking of an UPO in a horizontally cantilevered, periodically driven, elastic bronze ribbon. Stabilization of the UPO at each tracking step is performed via the local control method, which is a variant of OGY. Starting with feedback control vectors extracted from the analysis of the experimental data at each tracking step, the location of the UPO is redetermined using an adaptive orbit correction that exploits the applied control signal and the actual trajectory of the system. In this way, the UPO is tracked over a broad parameter regime where the chaotic attractor has disappeared and another periodic orbit has become stable. A physical system made of a magnetoelastic metal ribbon was also considered by Ding et al. [104], along with a pair of coupled Dufﬁng oscillators with periodic forcing, to demonstrate the viability in practical applications of a method of chaos control in high dimensions. Using small time-dependent perturbations of a single system parameter, the method achieves control by stabilizing a desired unstable periodic orbit with any number of unstable directions, which is a situation where the OGY method does not succeed. At the same time it is shown how, also in situ- ations (e.g., just one stable and one unstable direction) where the low dimensional control is effective, a higher dimensional implementation may prove to be more efﬁcient. In turn, a number of numerically oriented works were devoted to controlling chaos in smooth nonlinear systems such as the escape and/or Dufﬁng oscillators, via some variants of the OGY method. Investigating the possibility to control chaos in a temporally irregular envi- ronment, Ding et al. [43, 105] considered the softening Dufﬁng oscillator driven 226 G. Rega et al. by an irregular excitation as a model of ship rolling under lateral ocean waves. Heuristically incorporating a short-term monitoring and prediction feature of the future evolution of the environment into the OGY-SOGY control scheme, the authors were able to stabilize a period one orbit and prevent the ship capsizing that would occur, in absence of control, upon the boundary crisis of a chaotic attractor. One interesting topic addressed in [54] is the comparison of the OGY method with respect to other control techniques, which is very useful because it permits one to judge the good/bad performances of the method, and the range of its appli- cability. More precisely, Sifakis and Elliott [54] considered four different control techniques applied to the classical Dufﬁng oscillator: (i) open-loop periodic per- turbation method, which consists in adding a periodic perturbation to the system excitation, (ii) continuous delayed feedback method, i.e., the Pyragas [56] method, (iii) the Hunt method [102, 106], and eventually (iv) the OGY method [9]. As to the ﬁrst technique, in [54] the perturbation is chosen empirically by a trial-and-error procedure, whereas in other works it is optimally determined on the basis of a theo- retical analysis relying on system dynamical properties [37]. 3.3 Vibro-Impact and Friction Systems Impact is often undesired in engineering systems, for it causes excessive fatigue, noise, or even direct failure. As a consequence, systems are designed to avoid operating conditions that are conducive to impact, where possible. Of course, the proper choice of system parameters at the design stage represents the most basic form of passive control. However, in many cases, the engineer is not given the opportunity to completely deﬁne and specify all system characteristics before man- ufacture. Unforeseen changes in the operating environment, damage from exter- nal forces, or modiﬁed system requirements can lead to unexpected and unwanted responses, such as a multiple impacting chaotic motion, to be possibly suppressed with a control technique. In fact, the reduction of impacting events is a poten- tially important practical beneﬁt of using chaos control in the mechanical context [107]. Kalagnanam [108] applied the OGY algorithm to a spring-mass system that impacts with a sinusoidally vibrating table. Besides stabilizing its chaotic attractor on period-1 and period-2 orbits using small perturbations of the driving frequency, he demonstrated the ability to switch the chaotic system between the two orbits by controlled time dependent perturbations. Moreover, since the system exhibits long chaotic transients before settling onto the stabilized orbit, he exploited the exponential sensitivity of a chaotic system to small perturbations to control the duration of such a transient via the SOGY approach [46], which uses chaos to direct trajectories to targets and drastically reduces the average length of the chaotic transient. Begley and Virgin [80] showed how, using the adjustable friction force as the control parameter, the linear map approximation of the OGY method may work in Controlling Chaos: The OGY and an Alternative Control Method 227 a two-sided impact-friction oscillator for stabilizing either an ideally non-impacting response or a single-impact response corresponding to an UPO embedded in the chaotic attractor. Actually, while showing that, in mostly ideal cases, very little addi- tional control effort (corresponding to low-energy effective control) is required for stabilization by the OGY method once the system locks onto the unstable orbit, they also discussed how in different practical situations the control of many other UPOs may be unattainable: this happens, for example, if a signiﬁcant experimental noise is such as to push the system out of the linear region after control is established, or if large unstable eigenvalues, which are in fact common in impact systems due to substantial stretching of the phase space at impact, do occur. One important point for vibro-impact systems is that the temporal evolution of the dynamical variables consists of smooth motions governed by a linear differential equation interrupted by a series of non-smooth impacts, with the trajectories being thus discontinuous in phase-space. Due to discontinuities, the hard part of the OGY control process, which applies only tiny perturbations on an available control param- eter, is how to determine the value of parameter perturbation. For that, using the analytical solution of the differential equation and the impact rule, a transcendental (impact or discontinuity) map has to be determined, with the dynamical variables being computed at the impact instants. Referring to a fundamental discontinuity map with a square root singularity in the Jacobian, the so-called Nordmark map [109] that captures universal properties of impact oscillators near grazing, Casas and Grebogi [42] applied the OGY technique to select particular trajectories with a desired sequence of impacts and stabilized an unstable periodic orbit with one impact per period, involved in the grazing bifurcations, by adjusting slightly the parameter related to the external force. In turn, de Souza and Caldas [110], consider- ing an impact oscillator or an impact-pair system with the amplitude of excitation as control parameter, used a transcendental map to specify the parameter perturbation needed to implement the OGY method for stabilizing an UPO embedded in the chaotic attractor. Also for impact systems, a number of works were just explicitly “motivated” by OGY control or used some kind of “OGY-like” methods. Thus, Bishop et al. [111] developed a control strategy to stabilize period-1 impacting motions in an impacting driven beam undergoing complex motion associated with grazing bifur- cations, as the driving frequency is varied. Galvanetto [112] adapted to non-smooth systems a controlling algorithm previously developed for smooth systems [92], and used it for ﬁnding UPOs of a stick-slip system made of a chain of blocks on a moving belt and for stabilizing them by small changes of one or more control parameters. Motivated by the need to understand the nature of some nonlinear resonances in complex, multiactuated, servo-hydraulic structural engineering applications, Gutiérrez and Arrowsmith [113] analyzed the control of a mathematical model of the laboratory setup of a double-impacting system, studying the stability of low- order impact resonances in the context of the application of control techniques using displacement feedback. Preservation or annihilation of experimental and analyti- cal resonant periodic orbits was realized via control schemes based on the OGY 228 G. Rega et al. method, showing how the dissipative nature of impact resonances makes it possible to apply a low-dimensional analysis. It is also worth mentioning that vibro-impact systems with oscillating parts col- liding with rigid walls or with other vibrating components may have important practical applications. This is the case of impact dampers, where the vibration of a primary system is controlled by the momentum transfer through collisions with a secondary loose mass which bounces back and forth [114]. Impact dampers are used to control high-amplitude oscillations, such as those typically occurring in chaotic motion, and hence can be regarded as devices for controlling chaos in mechanical engineering systems [115], as in cutting tools, turbine blades, and chimneys. No direct application of the OGY method seems to have been made in this respect, to the authors’ knowledge. However, de Souza et al. [116] studied the control of chaotic impacts of a vibrating cart driven by a non-ideal motor, obtained by adding an impact damper consisting of a bouncing particle. The transfer of momentum which follows each collision between the particle and the walls attached to the cart is responsible for an effective coupling so that the motion of the cart can be controlled by the bouncing motion of the particle. With a very small value (about 0.5%) of the ratio between the masses of the bouncing particle and the cart, chaotic attractors are replaced by two stable trajectories with a kind of stabilization “resembling that achieved by the OGY technique”. Of course, from the technical point of view, the smaller the ratio of the masses, the easier it is to install such impact dampers in engineering systems like turbine blades and cutting tools. The authors also pointed out how, with respect to previous studies [114], the value of this ratio is considerably lowered due to the non-ideal character of the forcing, which is a consequence of its limited energy supply. Dry friction in mechanical oscillators can also lead to chaotic dynamics under periodic forcing. Moon et al. [117] demonstrated control and anti-control of chaos, namely stabilizing an UPO in a strange attractor or driving the system into a chaotic state near a periodic motion, in an experimental dry-friction oscillator obtained by adding lateral titanium friction plates to the cantilevered elastic beam with attached mass considered for control in Moon et al. [101]. Anti-control is often beneﬁcial in engineering devices such as robotic manipulators or cutting tools for normal machining of metals, where it corresponds to adding small noise or dither onto periodic oscillations, e.g., to break static friction or to avoid hysteretic behavior. Control and anti-control were based again on the “occasionally proportional feed- back” technique [102], and were effected by changing the normal force of the dry friction element via a magnetic actuator. 3.4 Coupled Mechanical Systems A number of coupled systems have been studied for control by using OGY-like methods. Considering a kicked double rotor system made of two connected massless rods, Feudel et al. [118] exploited its ability to access many different coexisting states, Controlling Chaos: The OGY and an Alternative Control Method 229 combined with its sensitivity and ﬂexibility, to gear the dynamics toward a speciﬁc periodic behaviour. They used a simple feedback control scheme making use of perturbations smaller than those of the standard OGY, and also smaller than the noise amplitude. In a tutorial paper devoted to controlling chaos in a dynamical system consti- tuted by two coupled dynamos, Agiza [119] also dealt with suppression of chaotic behavior to one of the UPOs embedded within the attractor but this was realized by nonfeedback or a delay feedback control method which does not require ﬁnding the UPO to be stabilized but needs its period only. Control and stabilization of an UPO of a chaotic system using a fuzzy system constructed on OGY method were investigated in Alasty and Salarieh [96], who applied the method to a Bonhoeffer-van der Pol oscillator representing a model of a two degree-of-freedom system kept in a ﬂuid ﬂow. Attention is focused to the advantages to be possibly obtained via fuzziﬁcation rather than on the application. It turns out that the transient response time and the control effort for stabilizing the period-4 unstable orbit with fuzzy-OGY controller are much less than with pure OGY control. This is due to the fact that when using fuzzy control the perturba- tion signals applied to the system are not sensible to the distance from the ﬁxed point of the periodic trajectory in phase space. Fuzziﬁcation of OGY perturbing signal causes a smoother perturbing signal in larger domains of time and Poincaré section. The main role of a fuzzy system is to make a control perturbing signal in the points which are far from the ﬁxed point, while in the near vicinity of ﬁxed point the perturbation made by the fuzzy system is similar to that made by the pure OGY controller. Robustness of controlled system against random disturbances also increases with fuzzy-OGY controller. Comparable favorable features are exhibited, to a certain extent, by a fuzzy-Pyragas controller with respect to the pure Pyragas one. A number of mechanical systems are actually high-dimensional, as it happens, e.g., in robotics. Underactuated manipulators arise in a number of important appli- cations such as free-ﬂying space robots, hyper-redundant manipulators, snake-like robots, and manipulators with structural ﬂexibility, among others. An important goal in manipulator control is to perform tasks involving the exact tracking of some desired trajectory. After a proper analysis of the particular device dynamics, exact tracking depends on the nature of the designed control algorithm. The absence of an actuator transforms the robot into an underactuated device that may lead to a malfunction of the system, to an erroneous tracking of the desired trajectory and in some cases to instability. Moreover, underactuated robots may exhibit rich dynami- cal behaviors including chaos [120, 121]. In addressing these issues, González-Hernández et al. [120, 121] dwelled on some limitations of earlier control techniques for stabilization of periodic orbits, including the OGY one, which are designed for systems described by three differ- ential equations yielding two-dimensional Poincaré or Lorenz maps and are only capable of imposing a particular dynamics for stabilization. Overall, they noticed how a general framework for control of higher-dimensional systems is not yet estab- lished. 230 G. Rega et al. In their paper, the authors aim at controlling higher-dimensional systems and at imposing a desired dynamics for stabilization. They report on the use of the Lorenz, instead of the Poincaré, map for the local identiﬁcation of the dynamics around the UPOs in a chaotic attractor, claiming that its use allows for better identiﬁcation schemes and avoids ill-conditioned identiﬁcation problems [122]. As a ﬁrst stage for achieving stabilization of periodic orbits embedded in higher-dimension chaotic attractors, based on system measurements, they propose a framework for designing ﬂexible control laws which still belongs to the class of parameter perturbation meth- ods. Flexibility means the capability to impose arbitrary dynamics with the proposed control law, which is applied to the so called Pendubot, namely an underactuated robotic system with two links. The proposed method offers a way to control chaotic systems without any prior knowledge of their dynamics, and needs a measure of only one of the system variables and the availability of a system parameter which can play the role of a control input. 3.5 Targeting in Astrodynamics Besides strict suppression of chaos, one important outcome of the OGY approach to chaos control has been the ﬂexible and efﬁcient exploitation of the complexity inherent in the chaotic dynamics for their technological uses. In particular, the inher- ent exponential sensitivity of chaotic time evolutions to tiny perturbations has been exploited for targeting, i.e. for rapidly directing a system to a desired accessible state [46]. Major relevant achievements have been obtained in the ﬁeld of astrodynamics, particularly related to the important and timely issue of spacecraft transfer, to be realized with a low consumption of propellant or energy. In general, controlling and targeting in chaotic Hamiltonian systems – which are the situations faced in astrodynamical problems related to spacecraft transfer – are not easy to accomplish. Besides the coexistence of interwoven chaotic and quasi- periodic regions, the phase space is divided into layered components, which are separated from each other by Cantori [123]. Typically, a trajectory initialized in one layer of the chaotic region wanders in that layer for a long period of time before it crosses the Cantori to wander in the next layer. Several targeting strategies have been proposed to overcome these difﬁculties, e.g., using small perturbations [124] to drive a trajectory from an unstable periodic orbit located inside a chaotic scattering region to a target point outside it, which is a major problem [125], and then applying in the “controllable region” a method of control of chaos derived from OGY [126]. Macau [127] applied the overall procedure to a Hamiltonian system in a “soft” chaotic Hamiltonian evolution, i.e., targeting in the planar, circular, restricted three-body problem which models the dynamics of a spacecraft moving in the Earth-Moon system and is a special case of the full three-body problem, where one of the masses is taken to be inﬁnitesimal and has no inﬂuence on the two primaries which are on circular orbits. A review of the relevancy and efﬁciency of the OGY strategy of chaos control to spacecraft steering in different Hamiltonian situations is presented in Macau and Controlling Chaos: The OGY and an Alternative Control Method 231 Grebogi [44], who also reported on the Hill problem governing the encounter phe- nomenon of two light bodies describing circular orbits around a heavy central body. In this case, the unstable periodic orbits embedded in a non-attracting chaotic invari- ant set related to chaotic scattering are exploited for in-orbit stabilization, namely to keep one satellite in orbit around the other [128]. It is worth stressing the importance and efﬁciency of control of chaos and tar- geting techniques as regards low-energy spacecraft transfer and in-orbit stabiliza- tion. Indeed, since the lifetime of an automatic space exploration mission is mainly deﬁned by the amount of fuel it can carry, the direct beneﬁts of chaotic transfer in astrodynamics are twofold, i.e., either allowing a spacecraft to go farther in explor- ing the limits of our Solar System, or saving the amount of fuel, which entails a larger amount of scientiﬁc instrumentation in the payload, since the liftoff capacity of a launch vehicle is limited. These techniques can also be used to rescue space- crafts that end up in a wrong trajectory accidentally, due to defects in the launch phase. 3.6 Atomic Force Microscopy Atomic force microscopy (AFM) is widely used for nano-scale material charac- terization and surface inspection in engineering applications. Indeed, as an imaging tool, AFM is capable of resolving surface features at the atomic level for conducting and non-conducting samples, and it is currently used in many imaging applications ranging from biological systems to semiconductor manufacturing. The mechanism of AFM basically depends on the interaction of a micro-cantilever with surface forces. The tip of the micro-cantilever interacts with the surface through a surface-tip interaction potential. One approach to measure the surface forces is to monitor the deﬂection of the micro-cantilever through a photodiode. This approach is named “contact mode”. Another approach termed “tapping mode” is performed by vibrating the micro-cantilever close to its resonance frequency, at a constant driving amplitude, and monitoring the changes in its effective spring constant. As reported in the introduction of Arjmand et al. [129], a micro-cantilever in tap- ping mode may exhibit chaotic behaviour in some regions of its physical parameters (damping value, excitation amplitude and frequency, average tip-sample distance), as observed experimentally [130] and veriﬁed theoretically [131] and numerically [132]. Yet, chaotic behavior is highly undesirable for AFM performance because it entails inaccurate measurements and low resolution of the achieved sample topog- raphy. Accordingly, it is always required to eliminate the possibility of chaotic motion of the micro-cantilever either by changing the AFM operating conditions to a region of parameter space where regular motion is assured or by designing an active controller that stabilizes the system on one of its UPOs. Arjmand et al. [129] developed a nonlinear delayed feedback control algorithm to stabilize the AFM micro-cantilever on its ﬁrst-order UPO, as well as a delayed feedback control via sliding mode scheme for chaos elimination. 232 G. Rega et al. In turn, Misra et al. [133] documented a variety of dynamical systems-based, control-theoretic analytical, computational and experimental tools for exploiting the natural oscillating dynamics of the cantilever in tapping-mode operation of AFMs. In particular, they applied different OGY-based feedback strategies to the AFM can- tilever dynamics described by a lumped-parameter model in which the spatial shape of the vibrating beam is approximated by its ﬁrst fundamental mode of vibration. By imposing discrete changes in the vertical offset between the cantilever support and the sample surface based on an estimated linearization of the system dynamics about a dynamically generated reference trajectory, they aimed at maintaining a desired oscillation amplitude of the cantilever and, indirectly, at extracting informa- tion during surface scanning of the sample proﬁle. Three different control schemes, full-state feedback, estimated-state feedback and partial-state feedback, are exam- ined in terms of their capability of stabilizing unstable periodic oscillations, reduc- ing the extent of transient dynamics in the vicinity of stable periodic oscillations, and maintaining a desired periodic oscillation while scanning the sample surface at fairly high lateral speeds, under the inﬂuence of a train of disturbance inputs in the form of surface proﬁle variations. Numerical results document increases in the speed of surface scanning, while preventing undesired transitions between different cantilever oscillations, as well as successful use of (in the absence of control) unsta- ble cantilever oscillations that achieve tapping-mode operation with relatively small contact velocities and short duration of contact. 4 An Alternative Uniﬁed Framework for Control of Non-regular Dynamics of Mechanical Systems One characteristic of the OGY method is that it exploits the chaotic properties of systems to achieve some desired performances, which in the speciﬁc case is the stabilization of an unstable saddle embedded in the chaotic attractor. There are several other methods which likewise exploit the chaotic performances of dynamical systems to obtain certain goals, although they refer to different features with respect to the OGY method. Among them, an important role is played by the methods aimed at eliminating, or shifting in parameters space, a given homoclinic or heteroclinic intersection which triggers unwanted dynamical phenomena [17, 37, 41, 134]. The objective of eliminating the homoclinic bifurcation can be reached in various manners, namely, 1. by adding a controlling parametric excitation to an uncontrollable external exci- tation, or viceversa [41]; 2. by modifying the excitation by adding controlling terms to a given uncontrollable one. This can be done, for example, by adding single or multiple subharmonics or superharmonics (or even ultra-subharmonics) to a given harmonic term [17, 37], and even by choosing these added terms in an optimal way [37]; 3. by modifying the parameters of the system. Controlling Chaos: The OGY and an Alternative Control Method 233 The last case is trivial from a theoretical point of view, and it is mentioned only because it can have some interest from a practical point of view. It just requires one to identify the chaotic region in the parameters space, and to change the parameters to stay outside that region. The ﬁrst two cases, on the other hand, are not very different from a concep- tual point of view. The differences are mainly (but not uniquely) technical: the common idea is that of adding controlling terms to eliminate a given, unwanted, homo/heteroclinic intersection. So, we can describe just one of them, and we will illustrate the technique developed by Lenci and Rega in a series of papers [26, 37, 62, 63, 107, 135–146]. Any kind of control method based on the elimination of homoclinic or hete- roclinic intersections, or better on shifting or eliminating the global bifurcations through which complex dynamics appear, requires various steps, both of theoretical and practical nature. Although they can be supported by analytical arguments, herein they are mostly discussed at a phenomenological level with the aim of introducing the general ideas and features of the method, usually not reported in regular publi- cations, and of highlighting its overall framework. Of course, the various technical aspects can be found in the speciﬁc papers. 4.1 Single Degree-of-Freedom Systems With the aim of capturing the key features without redundancies we refer to single degree-of-freedom (d.o.f.) models, which describe the dynamics of simple mechan- ical systems or of reduced order models of complex structures. This choice may appear very restrictive at a ﬁrst glance, but it is not. In fact, in general, the additional structure due to the higher dimensionality does not add any signiﬁcant element to the control ideas and to the theoretical apparatus, but contributes mainly technical difﬁculties, which we want to by-pass because they are not due to the control, or can possibly add new resources, thus enlarging instead of reducing the applicability of control. For example, in large dimensions, it may be difﬁcult to practically measure the distance between stable and unstable manifolds, which is necessary to detect the considered bifurcation. This implies that it may be difﬁcult to practically apply control to those structures, but this does not affect the theoretical characteristics of control, and the possibility of its application. What can instead occur is to take advantage of the complexity of the structure to look for further properties of the control, which add to those investigated with single d.o.f. models. According to the previous considerations, the generic system which will be con- sidered is governed by the ordinary differential equation ¨x + f1(x) + f2(x,˙x) + f3(x,t) = 0, (1) whose solution x(t) represents the status of the system. Four terms, which are the main “components” of a common mechanical system, occur in Eq. (1): inertia, ¨x, 234 G. Rega et al. conservative elastic restoring force, f1(x), dissipation or damping, f2(x,˙x), and exter- nal or parametric excitation, f3(x,t). Note that in general the term f2(x,˙x) may also provide a negative damping, i.e. it can pump energy into the system. However, in this work, we will consider only standard mechanical systems where f2(x,˙x) dissipates energy. (cid:19) When f2 and f3 vanish, the system (1) is Hamiltonian, or “conservative”. In this case, the Hamilton function H(x,˙x) = ˙x2/2 + f1(x)dx is constant along orbits. In mechanical language H is the total energy, sum of the kinetic K(˙x) = ˙x2/2 (cid:19) and potential V(x) = f1(x)dx energy. The terms f2 and f3 represent two different kinds of modiﬁcations, or perturbations, of an Hamiltonian system: those which extract energy from the system, and those which pump energy into the system, respectively. More difﬁcult situations can of course be found in the reality, but the case (1) is sufﬁcient for our purposes.

The ﬁrst consideration, less obvious than what might be thought, concerns the rel- evance of the global bifurcations for the complex behavior. In fact, we can have two different situations: bifurcations not directly related to a speciﬁc outcome in the system dynamics, and bifurcations immediately causing a strong variation in the response. While actually being the same dynamical phenomenon, there are strong differ- ences between the two classes of bifurcations. The former usually triggers chaotic mechanisms, such as, for example, the creation of a chaotic saddle, which do not immediately, and dramatically, inﬂuence the response, but which constitute the nec- essary pre-requisites for successive routes to chaos. Their effects are hidden behind the visible outcome, but they are not negligible, even from a practical point of view. Remarkable examples of this case are the homoclinic or heteroclinic orbits of hilltop saddles of Hamiltonian systems. Their invariant manifolds usually surround potential wells where the important part of the dynamics occurs, and constitute a barrier against the penetration of trajectories from out-of-well attractors eroding the well. Once this barrier has been broken by the global bifurcation, the (chaotic) effects can penetrate the well and, sooner or later, become visible. From the one side, this permits deeper understanding of the dynamical mechanisms involved in the event, especially with respect to safe well erosion [146, 147], and from the other side it permits detailed and speciﬁc investigations, to be followed by smart application of the control method. Due to the underlying Hamiltonian nature, these bifurcations can be usually detected analytically by the Melnikov method [48] or even directly in closed form. This is important because it permits a more general application of the control method [62, 137]. The second class of bifurcations is involved in speciﬁc boundary or interior crises, and determines sudden appearance/disappearance or enlargement of chaotic Controlling Chaos: The OGY and an Alternative Control Method 235 attractors or sudden modiﬁcations of their basins of attraction. Thus, their elimina- tion directly entails elimination of the crises, with immediate, visible, effects [136]. These are the situations where the class of control methods discussed in this section are very effective. Here in fact even a small control leads to remarkable results, and, e.g., the chaotic attractor can be easily removed/created. The drawback consists in the fact that these bifurcations are rarely related to hilltop saddles, and commonly cannot be easily detected or even discovered. In fact, it can (and actually does) occur that the saddle S directly responsible of a crisis is hidden by other, possibly more robust, saddles with an heteroclinic connection with S. This can generate an heteroclinic tangle [148], which makes any attempt to detect the saddle and its invariant manifolds a challenge from a practical (i.e. numerical) point of view, and even a somehow questionable theoretical issue. In the most fortunate cases where, in spite of previous difﬁculties, the detection is possible, it usually requires long, time consuming, and systematic numerical investi- gations, which are cumbersome and do not permit a full understanding of control or its full exploiting. Thus, the application of control is less general than in the former case. However, it should be clear that, strictly speaking, the detection of the saddles and of their manifolds, which is a necessary pre-requisite for applying control, is not a part of the control method, which can actually be developed, in its general lines, without any reference to a speciﬁc situation (and even, in some cases, without references to any speciﬁc systems). The ability of detecting the global bifurcations directly responsible for the observed crises simply provides a more powerful pos- sibility of eliminating/creating chaos by a straightforward application of a control method. The previous considerations explain why we will deal with homoclinic or het- eroclinic bifurcations of hilltop saddles (but see also [136] where the control is applied to a numerically detected homoclinic bifurcation of a non-hilltop saddle). In fact, although they are involved in boundary or interior crises only in some situa- tions, they are relatively easy to be analytically detected by the Melnikov or similar method, thus permitting a detailed development of the most important aspects of control, without reference to any speciﬁc situation. To support this choice, we fur- ther underline that the considered global bifurcations trigger the dynamical events eventually leading to chaos, so that its elimination is useful in any case. 4.3 Distance Between Stable and Unstable Manifolds From a practical point of view, the key to applying any kind of control based on the elimination of homoclinic or heteroclinic bifurcations is the detection of distance between the stable and unstable manifolds. To illustrate the main properties, we refer to an homoclinic bifurcation of a nearly Hamiltonian system (Fig. 1), i.e., a conservative system with small perturbations, which is supposed to have a saddle point with an homoclinic orbit. The major aim is that of verifying whether the homoclinic orbit survives or not when damping and 236 G. Rega et al. excitation, here seen as perturbations, are added. The objective of this section is indeed determining the distance between perturbed stable and unstable manifolds. In the absence of perturbations, the stable and unstable manifolds of the saddle coincide because they are constrained to have the same energy (Fig. 1a). 4.3.1 Effect of Damping When damping is added to the Hamiltonian system, the coinciding stable and unsta- ble manifolds – which still exist – split away from each other (Fig. 1b). In fact, the saddle does not change energy (being a ﬁxed point), the unstable manifold loses energy in forward time (and asymptotically approaches an attractor different from the saddle), and the stable manifold increases its energy backward in time (as it must approach the saddle as t → +∞ and its energy decreases forward in time). Thus, a homoclinic loop is no longer energetically possible and, on appropriate Poincaré maps, usually the stroboscopic one, there is a non zero distance between stable and unstable manifolds. It is easy to realize that this distance is proportional to the damping amplitude, herein denoted by εδ, and that in the case of small damping, it is approximately constant along a sufﬁciently short interval (Fig. 1b). (a) 1 x -1 (c) 1 -0.2 x -1 -0.2 homoclinic loop saddle unstable manifold stable manifold saddle εδa0 (b) 1 x -1 x unstable manifold stable manifold 1.8 -0.2 (d) 1 saddle D A C εγ a 1 1 (ω) cos (ωs) s B intersection points x -1 x 1.8 -0.2 x 1.8 unstable manifold stable manifold saddle D C A B intersection points x 1.8 Fig. 1 Schematic illustration of the distances between stable and unstable manifolds in an homo- clinic bifurcation of a nearly Hamiltonian system. (a) Hamiltonian case; (b) damped case; (c) harmonically excited case, excitation frequency = ω; (d) superharmonically excited case, excitation frequency = 2ω Controlling Chaos: The OGY and an Alternative Control Method 237 4.3.2 Effect of Excitation The second standard perturbation is the excitation f3(x,t), which is assumed to be periodic in time with angular frequency ω and zero mean value (a constant exci- tation simply shifts the reference/equilibrium point of the system). Furthermore, it is initially supposed to be harmonic and state independent or “external,” namely, f3(x,t) = εγ1 sin (ωt), εγ1 measuring the excitation amplitude. The extension to state dependent “parametric” excitations can be obtained by referring to the so called equivalent external excitation in the evaluation of the manifolds distance, as shown in [137]. Both the deﬁnitions of the amplitudes εδ and εγ1 are left somehow vague up to now, but the physical intuition is sufﬁcient for the purposes of the present section. We only stress that they are small by the introduction of the dimensionless smallness parameter ε. The excitation affects the invariant manifolds by producing an oscillating dis- tance on the Poincaré map, as shown in Fig. 1c, where some of the primary inter- section points (P.I.P., see [148]) are marked by A, B, C and D. Note that, according to common sense, the wavy pattern of the excitation produces a wavy pattern of the distance, and this is conﬁrmed by Fig. 1d, which shows that doubling the frequency of the excitation doubles the number of P.I.P. For what concerns the magnitude of the distance, it is clear that it is directly proportional to the excitation amplitude, and that for small amplitudes it depends linearly on it. Moreover, comparison of Figs. 1c and 1d shows that the magnitude of the distance also depends on ω, and in the particular case of Fig. 1 it (rapidly) decreases with increasing ω. In other cases it can instead increase with ω, but any- way the magnitude of the distance strongly depends on the excitation frequency. 4.3.3 The Perturbed Manifold Distance Based on the previous considerations, and focusing attention on the interval A − B − C −D of Fig. 1c, d, we can write the distance between stable and unstable manifolds in the following approximate way (see Fig. 1b, c): d(ωs) = εδa0 + εγ1a1(ω)g(ωs), (2) where s is an arc length parameter (Fig. 1c), a0 and a1(ω) are a constant and a func- tion depending on the speciﬁc dynamical system, and ε stresses that the assumed linearity with respect to δ and γ1 holds only for small damping and excitation amplitudes. The smallness is also tacitly assumed in the additive form of the dis- tance. Finally, in Eq. (2) g(ωs) is the oscillating part of the distance. It is due to the periodic excitation, and like it, it has zero mean value and is periodic with the same frequency. Since the excitation is harmonic and with small amplitude, it is possible to approximate g(ωs) with an harmonic function, e.g., g(ωs) = cos (ωs). Using cosine instead of sine has an unessential technical reason, linked to the choice of the point for which s = 0 (Fig. 1). 238 G. Rega et al. Equation (2) captures two opposite effects suggested by the physical intuition, according to which damping gives a positive distance, thus contributing to manifolds non-intersection, whereas harmonic excitation gives an oscillating distance, thus contributing to manifolds intersection. 4.3.4 More General Excitation and Damping. The extension of the previous consideration to the case of a non-harmonic, but still periodic and external, excitation f3(x,t) = ε N(cid:3) j=1 γj sin (jωt + Ψj) = = εγ1 N(cid:3) j=1 (cid:16) (cid:13) γj γ1 sin (jωt + Ψj) = εγ1f (ωt), (3) is straightforward. In fact, by using the linearity, consequence of the smallness of the amplitudes, we have that d(ωs) = εδa0 + ε N(cid:3) j=1 γja1(jω) cos (jωs + Ψj) = = εδa0 + εγ1a1(ω) N(cid:3) j=1 γja1(jω) γ1a1(ω) cos (jωs + Ψj) = = εδa0 + εγ1a1(ω)h(ωs), (4) More generally, the extension to arbitrary – but small – damping f2(x,˙x) and exci- tation f3(x,t) leads to an expression of the distance with the same structure as (4). The differences are only of technical nature, and appear in the expressions of a0 and a1(ω), and therefore in a different relation between the Fourier coefﬁcients of the excitation and those of the distance between the manifolds. In fact, it is not difﬁcult to accept that a generic periodic excitation gives an oscillating distance, and that the shape of this oscillation is due to the shape of the excitation in a way which can be computed, at least in principle. Therefore, from now on we will refer directly to (4) without specifying the nature of the system, of the damping and of the excitation, which indeed are “hidden” behind (4). A schematic representation of this distance is reported in Fig. 2. The constant part due to damping and the oscillating part due to the excitation are clearly shown. Equations (3) and (4) are written in the last forms because we assign εγ1 the role of overall excitation amplitude, while the remaining functions f (m) and h(m) measure the shape of the excitation and its effects on the manifolds distance. Note Controlling Chaos: The OGY and an Alternative Control Method 239 )min{ ( h m )} −γ ωa ( ) m ( h ) ( a ) m ( d 0 a δ d 0 m 2π Fig. 2 The schematic illustration of the distance between stable and unstable manifolds that, by deﬁnition, both f (m) and h(m) are 2π -periodic and f1 = h1 = 1, while hj = γj a1(jω) a1(ω) (fj and hj are the Fourier coefﬁcients of the respective functions). γ1 Furthermore, Ψ1 represents an unessential phase shift, and can be assumed equal to zero without loss of generality (it is sufﬁcient to consider ˆΨj = Ψj − jΨ1 instead of Ψj). 4.3.5 Reference (Natural) and Controlling Excitations The previous assumption of considering a general (although still periodic) excita- tion is important for the development of control, and is now brieﬂy discussed. In fact, if one wants to operate by modifying the excitation, for example, by adding to a given natural excitation a properly designed controlling excitation, as done in classical control [60], one must have clearly in mind that the natural excitation can- not be touched, otherwise the problem becomes trivial. In other words, one must have a reference, unchangeable, excitation with respect to which to measure the improvements due to the control. On the contrary, it is trivial to change the excitation in order to get a desirable dynamical response: it is sufﬁcient to look at the behavior chart of the system and chose the excitation (or its parameters) which provides the desired response. E.g., whatever the reference excitation is, if we are able to change its amplitude it is obvious that we can easily move from chaotic to non-chaotic response regimes. In this chapter, where only periodic excitations are considered, the reference is the harmonic excitation, which is the most natural and intuitive. Thus, we implicitly think of the excitation as made of two parts, f3(x,t) = εγ1 sin (ωt) + εˆf3(x,t) = εγ1{sin (ωt) + ¯f3(x,t)}, (5) 240 G. Rega et al. In general, the two parts have their own amplitudes, but we ﬁnd it useful to refer to a unique excitation amplitude, as done in the last expressions of (3), (4) and now in (5), where the overall excitation is just that of the reference excitation. Other choices are possible in principle, but the present one seems to be the most natural in the ﬁeld of the proposed control method. Within the framework of periodic excitations, the choice of the harmonic one as the reference excitation is not restrictive. In fact, if another reference excitation is chosen, then Eq. (5) becomes f3(x,t) = εγ1{ f3,ref(x,t) + ¯f3,cont(x,t)}, (6) where once more the amplitude of the reference excitation has been singled out and interpreted as the overall amplitude. By equating the two expressions of f3(x,t) given in (5) and (6) we get, ¯f3,cont(x,t) = sin (ωt) − f3,ref(x,t) + ¯f3(x,t), (7) so that if we know the control excitation ¯f3(x,t) in the case of harmonic reference excitation, then we know the control excitation ¯f3,cont(x,t) corresponding to any ref- erence excitation f3,ref(x,t). 4.3.6 Energetic Derivation of Perturbed Manifolds Distance The expression (4) is previously obtained by qualitative considerations. In spite of this, it provides exact information, because it gives the same manifolds distance as computed by the Melnikov method [148]. Furthermore, it can be derived by energy arguments as follows (see [149] for similar reasonings). An (hypothetic) homoclinic orbit xh(t) is possible if and only if the sum of the total energy Ed dissipated by damping and of the total energy Ep pumped by the excitation is zero. These energies are given by, respectively, Ed = Ep = (cid:17) +∞ −∞ (cid:17) +∞ −∞ f2[xh(t),˙xh(t)]˙xh(t)dt, f3[xh(t),t]˙xh(t)dt. (8) Let us deﬁne the “energetic distance” d = Ed + Ep, so that a condition for xh(t) to be an homoclinic orbit is (cid:17) +∞ −∞ d = f2[xh(t),˙xh(t)]˙xh(t)dt + (cid:17) +∞ −∞ f3[xh(t),t]˙xh(t)dt = 0. (9) Remark. An alternative, but equivalent, way to obtain (9) is the following. Multiply the ﬁeld equation (1) by ˙xh(t) and integrate in time from t = −∞ to t = +∞. We get H(+∞)−H(−∞)+d = 0, where H is the Hamilton function. Since the orbit is Controlling Chaos: The OGY and an Alternative Control Method 241 homoclinic, it approaches the same saddle for t = ±∞ , so that H(+∞) = H(−∞) and d = 0 follows. If d (cid:6)= 0 the guessed xh(t) cannot be an homoclinic orbit. Recalling [148] that an homoclinic intersection between stable and unstable manifolds implies the existence of an homoclinic orbit, it is possible to conclude that if we are able to show that no solutions of (1) exist satisfying (9) and approaching the same saddle at inﬁnity, then the manifolds keep disjoint and there is no homoclinic intersection. In other words, there is a link between the manifolds distance and the energetic distance, as they simultaneously vanish in the case of homoclinic intersection. By varying a system parameter, an homoclinic bifurcation occurs when both become zero for the ﬁrst time. The Eq. (9) holds in general, and it is an useful check for a guessed homoclinic solution. We specialize it to the considered case of a nearly Hamiltonian system. The unperturbed (Hamiltonian) system has an homoclinic orbit x0(t −s) (see Fig. 1), where t is the real time and s an arbitrary phase shift introduced because the refer- ence system is autonomous (see Eq. (1) with f2 = f3 = 0). Let the perturbations f2 and f3 be small, say of the order of ε (f2 → εf2 and f3 → εf3, see, e.g., Eq. (5)). Then, it is natural to assume that, under certain regularity conditions, any solution of the perturbed system is ε-close to the solution of the unperturbed one to which it is expected to converge when ε → 0. Accordingly, we assume xh(t) = x0(t − s) + εx1(t) + ..., (10) where x1(t) no longer contains the arbitrary phase because it is a solution of a non- autonomous system. Inserting (10) in (9) we get (cid:17) +∞ d(s) = ε{ −∞ (cid:17) +∞ f2[x0(t − s), ˙x0(t − s)] ˙x0(t − s)dt + f3[x0(t − s),t]˙x0(t − s)dt} + ... −∞ (cid:17) +∞ = ε{ −∞ (cid:17) +∞ f2[x0(t), ˙x0(t)]˙x0(t)dt + −∞ f3[x0(t), t + s]˙x0(t)dt} + ..., (11) namely, d(s) = ε{constant+periodic function of s}+higher order ε-terms. It is impor- tant to stress that this expression requires only the knowledge of the unperturbed homoclinic orbit x0(t), and that the constant part of (11) is due to the damping f2(x,˙x), while the periodic part of (11) is clearly related to the periodicity in time of the excitation f3(x,t). It is immediate to check that (11) and (4), which have been obtained under the same hypothesis of nearly Hamiltonian system, not only simultaneously vanish 242 G. Rega et al. in the case of homoclinic intersection, but they also have the same mathematical structure and the same functional dependence on the perturbations. It is then pos- sible to conclude that the latter provides the searched energetic justiﬁcation of the former. On the basis of the previous considerations we can even obtain formulas for a0, a1(ω) and h(ωs), which are the key elements of (4), by a direct comparison. It is easy to check that they provide the same expression of the classical Melnikov method [148], so that they are exact in the asymptotic sense. 4.3.7 Minimum Manifolds Distance Independent of its phenomenological derivation, its physical meaning or its exact calculation by the Melnikov or other methods, we have found that to look for homo- clinic intersections we have to search the zeros of the distance (4). First, we note that, as we are interested in the zeros of (4) and not in its sign, it is possible to assume a0 > 0 without loss of generality. Then, the distance is an oscil- lating function around a constant positive value, as schematically shown in Fig. 2. From this picture and from (4) it is seen that the distance d(ωs) has zeros if and only if its minimum d = min m∈[0,2π ] {d(m)} = εδa0 + εγ1a1(ω) min m∈[0,2π ] {h(m)} = εδa0 − εγ1a1(ω)M (12) is negative. When d is equal to zero for the ﬁrst time by varying a governing param- eter, for example the excitation amplitude, an homoclinic bifurcation occurs. Remark. The expression (12) is useful in the case in which a0 and a1(ω) have the same sign. If, on the other hand, they have a different sign, then we must consider d = min m∈[0,2π ] {d(m)} = εδa0 + εγ1a1(ω) max m∈[0,2π ] {h(m)} = εδa0 + εγ1a1(ω)M (13) instead of (12). In the expression (12) a key role is played by the number (cid:16) M = M (cid:13) γj γ1 ,Ψj = − min m∈[0,2π ] { = − min {h(m)} = m∈[0,2π ] (cid:16) γj γ1 a1(jω) a1(ω) (cid:13) N(cid:3) j=1 cos (jm + Ψj)}. (14) It is positive, because h(m) has zero mean value, and it does not depend on the overall excitation amplitude εγ1, which is singled out in (12). Indeed, it is just this property which suggested the previous choice of the overall excitation amplitude. Controlling Chaos: The OGY and an Alternative Control Method 243 While being independent of the excitation amplitude, M is instead strongly dependent on the shape of h(m) and, consequently, on the shape of the excitation. The most important property of M is that it summarizes in a unique number this dependence, or, equivalently, it summarizes the contribution of the superharmonics added to the reference harmonic excitation (see Eq. (5)). In the case of the harmonic excitation we have h(m) = cos (m), so that M = 1. This number therefore represents a reference value for M. In fact, we can distinguish between three families of periodic excitations: those for which M = 1, M < 1 and M > 1. The ﬁrst class is equivalent to the harmonic excitation for what concerns the homoclinic bifurcations. The second class is useful in the problem of control, as we will see in the sequel, while the latter can be used in the case of anti-control [141]. 4.4 Inﬂuence of the Parameters on the Manifolds Distance The most important result of the previous section, which is summarized by the expressions (12), is that the minimum distance between the stable and unstable manifolds has been computed as a function of the governing parameters. Roughly speaking, we can distinguish between various families of parameters. The ﬁrst family is constituted by the mechanical system parameters such as mass, linear and nonlinear stiffnesses, etc. In (12) they are embedded in the deﬁnitions of a0 and a1(ω). For a given mechanical oscillator they are known, while they can be modiﬁed in the design process. Their inﬂuence cannot be discussed in general, because (i) it strongly depends on the mechanical characteristics of the system (hard- ening vs. softening, etc.), and (ii) it depends on how a0 and a1(ω) depend on the mass and stiffnesses, and this considerably varies from system to system, as it can be seen by comparing the expressions obtained for different oscillators [37]. The second family consists of the main parameters of the perturbations, such as damping and excitation amplitude and frequency, which are instead singled out in (12). Also these parameters can be considered as data, for a given problem, or can be modiﬁed during the design. In the considered case of small perturbations, damp- ing and excitation amplitude inﬂuence linearly the minimum distance (12), and so their effects can be easily understood. In particular, note that when the damping is zero with non zero excitation, d is always negative, namely, there is always homo- clinic intersection in almost Hamiltonian systems (Fig. 1c, d). On the contrary, with damping and without excitation d is always positive so that there is no homoclinic intersection at all (Fig. 1b). More involved is the inﬂuence of the excitation frequency. In this respect, we can only infer that limω→0 a1(ω) = 0, because ω = 0 corresponds to static excitation which does not pump energy into the system, and that limω→∞ a1(ω) = 0, because when the frequency is very high, only the time average of the excitation actually forces any given inertial system: but since the excitation is periodic, the average 244 G. Rega et al. is zero, so that the system is basically not forced, and the oscillating term in the distance disappears. The last family we consider is constituted by the excitation shape parameters γj/γ1 and Ψj, which are the key ingredients for the forthcoming analysis. Their inﬂuence on the minimum distance is summarized by the number M, which basically plays the role of an interface between the excitation shape and d. Not only are these parameters very important in the control method which is the object of this section (because they are allowed to vary for control design purposes), but they are also the less common because usually the excitation is considered as harmonic (sinusoidal). Thus, they deserve special attention. Actually, the dependence of d on M is linear, and thus it is trivial. The non trivial point is instead the (nonlinear) dependence of M on γj/γ1 and Ψj. The things are quite involved because the dependence of M on γj/γ1 is modulated by the factors a1(jω) a1(ω) appearing in the deﬁnition of hj. Since these factors are system dependent, because so is a1(s), we cannot discuss in general the dependence of M on γj/γ1. What we can do in a uniﬁed way, i.e. without referring to a speciﬁc mechanical system, is to analyze the dependence of M on hj (and on Ψj). To illustrate this fact by an example, we consider N = 2, i.e. a single added superharmonic. The function M(h2,Ψ2) = − minm∈[0,2π ]{cos (m) + h2 cos (2m + Ψ2)} is plotted in Fig. 3, from which we see that both h2 and Ψ2 strongly inﬂuence M. More precisely, we clearly see that there are regions for which M < 1, which will be useful for control, and regions for which M > 1, which are useless (dangerous indeed) with respect to the control features. These conclusions are general and hold also for the case N > 2. 4.5 Homoclinic Bifurcation Thresholds The multidimensional parameters space can be divided in two regions, accord- ing to whether the manifolds minimum distance is positive, corresponding to non intersecting, or detached, manifolds, or the minimum distance is negative, corre- sponding to intersection. The boundary between these two regions, i.e., the locus of points d = 0, corresponds to manifolds tangency, namely, to the homoclinic, or heteroclinic, bifurcation. In fact, crossing this boundary the manifolds become intersecting (or detach, according to the direction of crossing). The detection of this boundary is crucial for the control method based on the elimination of the homoclinic or heteroclinic bifurcations. In fact, the method can also be interpreted as aimed at shifting this boundary in a certain direction, usually toward higher excitation amplitudes. It is common to represent the bifurcation threshold in terms of excitation ampli- tude, namely, to solve d = 0 with respect to γ1. As a matter of fact, this is one of the reasons why we pay a lot of attention to the deﬁnition of a proper excitation amplitude along this section. Controlling Chaos: The OGY and an Alternative Control Method 245 Fig. 3 The function M(a,b), where a = h2 = (cid:12) (cid:11) γ2 γ1 a1(2ω) a1(ω) ∈ [0,0.65] and b = Ψ2 ∈ [0,π ] The solution of d = 0 represents the critical excitation amplitude threshold for which the homoclinic or heteroclinic bifurcation takes place, and it will be denoted by γ1,cr. If the distance can be expressed by (12) the computation of the critical threshold is trivial: γ1,cr = δa0 a1(ω) 1 M . (15) The simplicity of the previous expression is obviously a consequence of the lin- ear nature of the distance with respect to γ1, which however no longer holds in more general cases, such as, for example, those in which the manifolds distance is computed numerically [136]. Here, the solution of d = 0, while being conceptu- ally simple, requires an extra computational effort consisting of solving a nonlinear algebraic equation. Furthermore, the equation is known only in a discrete set of points, and this is another element of difﬁculty. In any case, irrespective of how the critical excitation amplitude has been computed, exactly, like in piece-wise linear systems [62, 140], by a perturbative approach, like in (15), or numerically, this value is eventually a function of all the other parameters of the system. It is interesting that the excitation shape enters the expression (15) only by means of the single number M, which evidently summarizes also in this respect the effects of the superharmonics added to the basic harmonic excitation. Of course, this property is not expected to hold in general, and in other cases the dependence of γ1,cr upon the excitation shape is more involved. 246 G. Rega et al. We remark that both the minimum distance d (through Eq. (12)) and the homo- clinic bifurcation threshold γ1,cr (through Eq. (15)) are inversely proportional to the excitation shape parameter M, i.e., the smaller M, the larger d and γ1,cr. The inﬂuence of the other parameters is complex, and in general it is far from linear. In fact, only the damping δ enters linearly in (15), this being a consequence of its smallness. In general, not even a qualitative estimate is possible a priori. For example, for some mechanical systems the critical threshold of the homoclinic bifurcation of the hilltop saddle tends to a ﬁnite value when the excitation frequency tends to zero (e.g., the inverted pendulum between lateral barriers [62]) while in others it is unbounded (e.g., the Helmholtz oscillator [137]). This is a consequence, or perhaps a source, of the fact that chaotic behaviour – which is strongly related to global bifurcations – is not monotonic with respect to any parameter. A special situation occurs for the class of excitations having M = 1, which includes the harmonic excitation. Since it is considered as the reference one, we indicate by γ h a1(ω) the corresponding critical threshold. According to this deﬁnition, Eq. (15) can be written in the equivalent form = δa0 1,cr γ1,cr = γ h 1,cr 1 M . (16) This expression has the advantage of splitting into two independent parts the main dependences of γ1,cr upon the system parameters. In fact, γ h 1,cr contains all informa- tion regarding the mechanical system, such as mass, stiffness, etc., and the reference excitation, such as its kind (i.e., external, parametric, etc.) and frequency, while M contains information only on the excitation shape (or on the controlling part of the excitation). This property does not hold in more general situations, for example when the critical threshold is computed by numerical methods without any assumptions on the smallness of the excitation amplitude. Here all the parameters of the systems are strongly coupled, and it is not possible to single out the dependence on the excitation shape. When the excitation is periodic, irrespective of being harmonic (i.e., sinusoidal) or not, external or parametric, etc., it is usual to draw the critical amplitude as a function of the excitation frequency, for ﬁxed values of all the other parameters. An example referring to the Helmholtz oscillator [137] is reported in Fig. 4. Here the excitation is periodic, and accordingly, the critical threshold is γ h From Fig. 4 it is clear how the parameters subspace is divided in the two regions of homoclinic intersection and homoclinic detachment. The ﬁrst one is the region of the so-called “Melnikov chaos,” where various manifestations of chaos are expected: some of them, such as fractal basin boundaries, sensitivity to initial conditions, etc., will certainly occur, although to a different extent, while others, such as the chaotic attractors, are only theoretically feasible, but not necessarily exist in the whole region. When chaos – in all its manifestations – is considered as an undesirable 1,cr. Controlling Chaos: The OGY and an Alternative Control Method 247 event, this region must be regarded as unfeasible, or dangerous, and care is needed in staying sufﬁciently far away from it. The region of Melnikov chaos is “unbounded” and convex in Fig. 4. There are no reasons to believe that these properties are general, and both bounded and/or non convex sets of homoclinic intersection are expected to occur, at least in principle. Even non-connected sets are possible. 4.6 Control Ideas So far we have obtained all the necessary prerequisites for application of the control method, i.e., we have related the manifolds minimum distance d and the homoclinic (or heteroclinic) bifurcation threshold γ1,cr to the system parameters, and we are now in a position to describe the control ideas. There are two conceptually different approaches, which however in some cases are equivalent and yield the same control implementation. In a ﬁxed situation, namely, for a given system, given operational conditions and, therefore, given system parameters, one can be interested in eliminating the stable and unstable manifolds intersection by the action of control. This entails acting on the system in such a way that the minimum manifolds distance passes from nega- tive to positive. Global bifurcations are not directly involved in this case, although assuming that there is a continuous passage from the uncontrolled (intersection, negative distance) to the controlled (no intersection, positive distance) system, obvi- 3 γ 1,cr δ 0 0 region with homoclinic intersections γ h 1,cr region without homoclinic intersections ω 2 Fig. 4 The critical threshold γ h oscillator [137] 1,cr as a function of the excitation frequency ω, for the Helmholtz 248 G. Rega et al. ously there is an intermediate condition in which the distance is zero, corresponding to a homoclinic (or heteroclinic) bifurcation. This approach can be of interest in speciﬁc situations, and when an overall pic- ture of the control properties is not needed. Accordingly, only a “local” analysis is required. For varying system parameters (e.g., the excitation amplitude), on the other hand, one can be interested in shifting the homoclinic (or heteroclinic) bifurcation thresh- old in parameters space by the control action. Herein, the global bifurcation becomes the key point, and in principle the analysis is more complete and, consequently, more difﬁcult. Practically this approach is aimed at modifying the regions of non homoclinic bifurcation of Fig. 4 by changing their boundaries. By comparing the two approaches, one notes that the former is the most nat- ural when the control is considered from a dynamical system point of view, as it involves only topological properties, while the latter is the most natural when the control is considered from an engineering point of view, because it concerns also practical aspects, such as the behaviour in parameters space, which have important consequences in terms of system response. Actually, if the two control targets (manifolds distance and critical excitation amplitude) have the same dependence on problem parameters, the two approaches are practically equivalent, though remaining conceptually distinct. An important example is that in which we consider the homoclinic bifurcations of nearly Hamilto- nian systems, detected by the Melnikov method (see previous sections), and assume the shape of the excitation as control action. We have shown in (12) and (14) that the minimum distance and the homoclinic bifurcation threshold, respectively, are both inversely proportional to the shape parameter M, so that in both cases control entails decreasing M. In more general cases, such as those in which the distance is computed numer- ically without any speciﬁc restriction on the system, the two approaches remain distinct also from a practical point of view, and in principle they lead to practically different results, although similar qualitative behaviours are expected in common situations. 4.7 Gains and Saved Region To quantify the improvement of control with respect to the reference (harmonic) excitation in terms of homoclinic bifurcation threshold, it is useful to introduce the so-called gain G = γ1,cr γ h 1,cr = 1 M , (17) which is the ratio between the critical threshold with control and the critical thresh- old in the reference case. Controlling Chaos: The OGY and an Alternative Control Method 249 With this deﬁnition, we can reformulate the control idea by saying that it consists in increasing the gain by varying γj and Ψj. The region γ h 1,cr(ω) < γ1 < γ1,cr(ω) = Gγ h 1,cr(ω) is the zone of parameters space where arbitrary periodic excitations are theoretically effective in eliminating homoclinic chaos (with respect to the harmonic excitation), and it has been called saved, or controlled, region [37]. Thus, another, equivalent, point of view about the control method is that it is aimed at obtaining a saved region in the excitation amplitude-frequency parameters space. The saved region for Helmholtz systems, whose homoclinic bifurcation threshold is depicted in Fig. 4, is reported in Fig. 5 in the case of an ω-independent value of the gain G. From this picture it is evident how the saved region is obtained by shifting the homoclinic bifurcation threshold toward higher excitation amplitudes. 4.8 Optimal Control and Optimization Problems In the previous sections it has been established that the control method consists in varying the shape of the excitation in order (i) to increase the distance between stable and unstable manifolds, or (ii) to increase the homoclinic bifurcation threshold, or (iii) to obtain a saved region. It is natural to do these operations in a clever way, i.e., by choosing among all admissible excitations the one which maximizes the considered target function (d, γ1,cr or the magnitude of the saved region). This point represents the second keystone of the considered control method, and is discussed in this section. 3 γ 1,cr δ 0 0 region with homoclinic intersections γ 1,cr γ h 1,cr saved region region without homoclinic intersections ω 2 Fig. 5 The saved region for the Helmholtz oscillator [137] of Fig. 4 250 G. Rega et al. In both cases (i) and (ii), pursuing the objective to maximize the manifolds dis- tance or the homoclinic critical threshold entails increasing the gain G introduced in (17). But choosing among all admissible excitations the one which maximizes the gain leads to the optimization problem Problem P0. Maximize G by varying the Fourier coefﬁcients γj and Ψj of the exci- tation, whose solution provides the best or optimal excitation. Since increasing G entails decreasing M = 1/G, and decreasing the positive number M entails increasing −M = min {h(m)}, m∈[0,2π ] it is possible to rewrite problem P0 in its extended form: Problem P0’. Maximize minm∈[0,2π ]{h(m)} by varying the coefﬁcients γj and Ψj of h(m) = a1(jω) a1(ω) cos (jm + Ψj). N j=1 γj γ1 (cid:18) (cid:11) (cid:12) 4.8.1 Universal Optimization Problem It is useful to reformulate problem P0 in the following equivalent form: Problem P1. Maximize minm∈[0,2π ]{h(m)} by varying the Fourier coefﬁcients hj and Ψj of h(m) = cos (m) + N j=2 hj cos (jm + Ψj). (cid:18) The key advantage in passing from problem P0 to problem P1 is that the latter is system-independent, i.e. universal. This can be ascertain by noticing that in P0 the system-dependent function a1(ω) is present, while it disappears in P1, where the variable coefﬁcients γj are “replaced” by the variable system-independent coef- ﬁcients hj. Note that the function a1(ω) not only is system dependent, but in general it also depends on the speciﬁc homoclinic orbit considered in systems having more than one homoclinic intersection. Being universal, problem P1 can be solved just once, and its solution is univer- sally valid, namely, it is not necessary to solve problem P1 for each speciﬁc system. To illustrate the solution of problem P1, let us ﬁrst consider the simplest case N = 2, i.e., the excitation is constituted by the basic harmonic plus one controlling superharmonic. This case can be handled manually [137]. In fact, the optimal choice is Ψ2 = 0, and M(h2) = − min m∈[0,2π ] {h(m)} = − min {cos (m) + h2 cos (2 m)} m∈[0,2π ] # 1 − h2,h2 + 1 8h2 = min $ , (18) Controlling Chaos: The OGY and an Alternative Control Method 251 so that G(h2) = 1/M(h2). This function is depicted in Fig. 6, from which we infer that {G(h2)} = √ 2, (19) GN=2 optimal = max h2 √ this maximum being attained for h2 = 2/4. The cases with more superharmonics are conceptually similar, but computation- ally more difﬁcult, and they have been solved numerically after having proved that the condition Ψj = 0 is still optimal [37]. The results are reported in Table 1, which also shows that for N → ∞ the solution h(m) tends to a well deﬁned limit consti- tuted by a positive Dirac delta of amplitude π at m = 0 plus the constant function −1/2 (whose Fourier coefﬁcients are in fact hj = 1 and Ψj = 0). It is proved in [26, 62] that this last function actually represents the mathematical solution of the optimization problem in the case of an inﬁnite number of superharmonics. Table 1 The numerical results of various optimization problems with increasing number of super- harmonics h5 h4 h3 N GN optimal h2 2 1.4142 0.353553 3 1.6180 0.552756 0.170789 4 1.7321 0.673525 0.333274 0.096175 5 1.8019 0.751654 0.462136 0.215156 0.059632 ... ... ∞ 2 ... 1 ... 1 ... 1 ... 1 1.5 1 G (h2) 0 – 0.5 1.5 1. 5 – 0.5 0 h 2 0 1.5 Fig. 6 The function G(h2) in the case of a single superharmonic (N = 2) 252 G. Rega et al. 2.6 N = 4 N = 3 N = 2 h m( ) 0 –M ∞ –1 0 N – 5 2 2.6 0 m –1 2π Fig. 7 Different optimal functions h(m) for N = 2, ..., 5 Examples of optimal h(m) are reported in Fig. 7 from which it is clear that the optimal solution is characterized by the presence of multiple coinciding minima. It is also possible to foresee the convergenge of that family of solutions to the limit solution for N → ∞ discussed above. 4.8.2 From the Universal Optimal Solution to the Real Optimal Excitation The link between the optimal solutions obtained in the previous point and the real optimal excitation to be applied to the structure is represented by the relations γj = hjγ1 a1(ω) a1(jω) , so that the optimal excitation can be written as f3(x,t) = εγ1a1(ω) N(cid:3) j=1 hj a1(jω) sin (jωt), which, when compared with (5) provides the optimal controlling excitation ¯f3(x,t) = a1(ω) N(cid:3) j=2 hj a1(jω) sin (jωt). (20) (21) (22) In (21) and (22) there are the “universal” coefﬁcients hj, which can be taken from Table 1 and do not need to be recalculated each time, and the function a1(ω) which is Controlling Chaos: The OGY and an Alternative Control Method 253 instead system dependent and thus changes when the control is applied to different cases. The previous consideration further underlines one interesting, and useful, aspect of the proposed control method. In fact, upon solving the difﬁcult part, namely the solution of the mathematical optimization problem, the operator is just left with the “technical” problem of computing the function a1(ω) which can be “easily” done by looking at the manifolds behaviour, as discussed in the previous sub-sections. This makes the application of the control method straightforward. Another issue arises when passing from the universal solution to practical appli- cations. In fact, for technical reasons it may be useful to have some limitations on the optimal solution (for example, one can ask that |γj| < |γ1|, or that maxt∈[0,T]{¯f3(x,t)} < const., etc.). These requirements can be introduced as constraints in the optimiza- tion problem P1. While not introducing special conceptual difﬁculties (although more sophisticated tools may be required to search for the optimal solution), these constraints are usually system dependent, so that the optimization problem turns into a non universal one, which is not generic and has to be solved separately for each system. This makes the application of the control method much more involved. Constrained optimization problems have been solved in [137]. 4.9 Extended (“Global”) and Localized (“One-Side”) Application of Control In many mechanical systems, such as symmetric oscillators, there is more than one homoclinic bifurcation which is relevant for complex dynamics and needs to be controlled (i.e., eliminated or shifted in parameter space). In this situation, the presence of two or more homoclinic orbits permits a choice between different control strategies. Indeed, we can: 1. control only one (e.g., the right or the left in symmetric systems) homoclinic bifurcation, irrespective of what happens to the others, 2. control simultaneously two or more of them (e.g., the right and the left in sym- metric systems), 3. control simultaneously all of them. The choice 1 (called “one-side control” [37]) is aimed at obtaining a topologically localized control, and can be pursued by applying the points of the previous sec- tion separately to each homoclinic loop. Of course, in this case we will have an optimal excitation for each homoclinic intersection to be removed, and since these are system- and orbit-dependent, there is no hope that the optimal excitation able to remove one homoclinic intersection also succeeds in removing the other homoclinic intersections (indeed, the non-controlled homoclinic bifurcation threshold is usually lowered). The choice 2 is aimed at controlling an extended part of the phase space, while the choice 3 is aimed at controlling the whole phase space, and thus it has been 254 G. Rega et al. called “global control” [37]. They require further considerations, as a consequence of the fact that in this case we want to control simultaneously more homoclinic intersections, i.e., we have to spread the resources available for optimization over different undesired events. The ﬁrst characteristic property of this case is that the underlying optimization problem is no longer universal, apart from the special case of symmetric systems with two symmetric homoclinic loops. Unfortunately, things are even more com- plex, and different approaches/strategies are possible. A detailed description of the whole scenario is reported in [139] with reference to the Helmholtz – Dufﬁng oscil- lator. Some main results are summarized in the following. 4.9.1 Global Control of Gains Aiming at controlling simultaneously more homoclinic bifurcations, we have to monitor the control target (distance d or homoclinic bifurcation threshold γ1,cr) of each homoclinic loop. From a mathematical point of view this goal can be obtained by controlling the minimum value among all bifurcations, which guarantees that all critical thresholds will not be reduced. Since both the distance and the homoclinic bifurcation thresholds are propor- tional to the gain G, the ﬁrst possible approach consists of maximizing the minimum gain, which yields the following optimization problem: Problem P2. Maximize G = min{G1,G2,...,GL} by varying the Fourier coefﬁcients γj and Ψj of the excitation. In the problem P2 we have that Gk = 1/Mk and Mk = − min m∈[0,2π ] ⎧ ⎨ ⎩ (cid:13) N(cid:3) j=1 (cid:16) γj γ1 1(jω) ak 1(ω) ak cos (jm + Ψj) ⎫ ⎬ ⎭ , (23) where k = 1,2,..,L is the number of homoclinic bifurcations to be controlled simul- 1(ω) is the function corresponding to the k-th homoclinic loop. Note taneously, and ak that in general all Mks are distinct from each other. The (unavoidable) presence of the functions ak 1(ω) in problem P2 shows that it is system-dependent. In [139], where only the case L = 2 is considered, this problem has been named “global control without symmetrization,” because the homoclinic bifurcation thresh- olds γ k 1,cr, which are distinct in the reference case, remain distinct also in the optimal case. In the same paper the optimization problem has been solved in some speciﬁc cases, showing that 1. the optimal gain is much lower than that obtained in the “one-side control” (see Table 1); 2. at the optimum, the condition G1 = G2 is attained. Controlling Chaos: The OGY and an Alternative Control Method 255 Roughly speaking, property 1 is a consequence of the fact that now the control “efforts” are spread over more homoclinic orbits, instead of being concentrated on a single one. This property is expected to be general, contrary to property 2 which is expected not to be satisﬁed, especially in the presence of more homoclinic loops. 4.9.2 Global Control of Homoclinic Bifurcation Thresholds In the previous strategy the homoclinic bifurcation thresholds remain distinct after the application of control. It could be desirable to have a control providing, or attempting to provide, the same homoclinic bifurcation thresholds, even at the price of reducing some of them with respect to the values for harmonic excitation. This consideration leads to another optimization problem: ( ) Problem P3. Maximize γ1,cr = min coefﬁcients γj and Ψj of the excitation, 1,cr, γ 2 γ 1 1,cr,..., γ L 1,cr by varying the Fourier where γ k 1,cr = δak 0 1(ω) ak 1

Mk . (24) Note that, contrary to the previous case, now also the different expressions ak 0 are taken into account – and this further stresses how also this case is system-dependent. In [139] this problem has been called “global control with symmetrization.” For increasing control “resources,” the optimization problem works in the fol- lowing way. It increases the lowest value of γ k 1,cr, until it reaches the subsequent lowest value (which could be lowered – with respect to the harmonic case – during this ﬁrst phase), say γ 5 1,cr and γ 5 1,cr, until they reach the subsequent lowest value (again, possibly decreased), and so on. This process ends when: 1,cr. Then, it increases simultaneously γ 3 1,cr, say γ 3 1. The “resources” for control ﬁnish after having equalized all the γ k 1,cr. This case has been named “global control with achieved symmetrization” in [139], and the optimal solution is characterized by γ 1 1,cr, which represents a desired circumstance. = ... = γ L = γ 2 1,cr 1,cr 2. The “resources” for control ﬁnish before having equalized all the γ k 1,cr. This case has been named “global control with pursued symmetrization” in [139]. Of course, the former case is expected when the homoclinic bifurcations of the different loops under harmonic excitation are close to each other, as occurs, for example, for weakly asymmetric systems. The latter case, on the other hand, is expected when the reference homoclinic bifurcations are very different from each other; a limit situation is represented by the case in which the reference homoclinic bifurcation thresholds are so different that control uses all its resources to increment the lowest value, so that in this case this approach coincides with the “one-side control.” 256 G. Rega et al. 4.10 On the Application of the Control Methods to Archetypal Single-d.o.f. Systems In the previous sub-sections, a phenomenological analysis of the homoclinic and heteroclinic bifurcations of the invariant manifolds of a saddle triggering the occur- rence of complex events in dynamical systems has been presented for a generic, periodically excited, oscillator, along with the basic idea and the objective of their control, and some ensuing optimization problems. The next issue consists in applying the control method to speciﬁc nonlinear oscil- lators. This has been the subject of a number of research papers [62, 63, 107, 135– 146] which the reader is referred to for the details of successful application. Herein, we just aim at giving an overview of some main characterizing features of the considered systems. In this respect, it is important to refer to a suitable number of archetypal oscillators with a well-deﬁned mathematical character and such to reliably describe the physical behaviour of real systems in engineering science and mechanics. Of course, their presentation and discussion has to be suitably organized. Indeed, nonlinear oscillators can be classiﬁed based on different viewpoints, accord- ing to whether the focus is preferably on dynamical or control aspects, while paying attention – in any case – to the characterizing features of physical world applications and to the associated computational aspects. Herein, with the aim of stressing the mechanics environment wherein this chap- ter – devoted to exploiting system dynamics for control purposes – has nurtured, we choose to assume a basically mechanical viewpoint with the associated dynamic phenomena in the background, by highlighting those features of the considered sys- tems which entail more meaningful control aspects. Within this overall scheme, systems are categorized according to different features, namely whether they are (i) smooth or non-smooth, whether they are characterized by (ii) single-well or multi-well potentials, by (iii) softening or hardening behaviour, by (iv) symmetric or asymmetric characteristics, also considering the occurrence or non-occurrence of a system natural frequency, and whether the technical interest is towards their (v) transient or steady response. Of course the necessary attention is also payed to the characterizing mechanical phenomena to be possibly controlled. In terms of formulation and implementation of the dynamically based control strategy, a second viewpoint pays due attention to those geometrical and compu- tational aspects which play a fundamental role in describing and understanding the system dynamics and in evaluating the performance of the control procedure, respectively. In this respect, the most meaningful alternatives are concerned, on one side, with dealing with either (i) homoclinic or heteroclinic manifolds, and with controlling either (ii) overall or local bifurcational events; on the other side, with the possibility to develop an (i) approximate or exact bifurcation analysis, and to implement a (ii) mainly theoretical or purely numerical control strategy. Of course, strong cross-correlations do occur amongst several of the above mentioned classi- ﬁcation criteria. They are however believed to maintain their own interest in the aim of schematically organizing a quite rich and involved scenario of mechanical systems as well as of comparing the respective dynamic behaviours. Controlling Chaos: The OGY and an Alternative Control Method 257 4.10.1 Smooth vs. Non-smooth Systems Smoothness or non-smoothness are a basic property of mechanical systems with important consequences as regards their mathematical description and dynamical characterization. Thus, they are assumed as a ﬁrst criterion to distinguish between two broad classes of systems. Due to the occurrence of discontinuities in either the displacement or the veloc- ity, non-smooth systems exhibit a further enriched pattern of response classes and local/global bifurcations with respect to the already involved scenario of smooth systems, along with some main novelties in the dynamics features. In terms of the proposed control, the main difference is that in smooth systems the homoclinic bifurcation cannot be computed analytically, not even for the homoclinic orbits of hilltop saddles. The only analytical results are obtained by perturbative approaches, as the Melnikov method [148] or the method illustrated in Sect. 4.3. For the piece-wise linear systems, instead, the homoclinic bifurcation threshold can be computed exactly, and this allows a more detailed application of control. A number of fully nonlinear oscillators with continuous-type nonlinearities, of either exact (such as the mathematical pendulum) or approximate, polynomial- kind (such as the Dufﬁng [136, 138], Helmholtz [137], Helmholtz-Dufﬁng [139] oscillators, a micromechanical system [142]) nature, have been considered. The latter mostly – though not exclusively – describe the nonlinear single-mode, non- internally resonant, dynamics of a number of smooth inﬁnite-dimensional systems of interest in structural and engineering mechanics. Two piecewise linear oscillators have been dealt with, i.e. the impacting inverted pendulum [26, 62, 135, 107] and the rocking rigid block [63, 140, 141], to be intended, respectively, as paradigmatic models for non-smooth nonlinear dynamics of mathematical/mechanical signiﬁcance or more practical interest. 4.10.2 Single-Well vs. Multi-Well Potentials Depending on the energy imparted to the system through the initial conditions or the excitation amplitude, as well as on the values of other control parameters, two main issues are of considerable practical importance for a mechanical system, namely (i) the possibility to have the system actually working within the range of operating conditions which it has been designed for, and (ii) the loss of technical performance or structural integrity ensuing from the system getting off its foreseen operational regime. In dynamical terms, it is possible to restrict ourselves to systems characterized by the existence of either a single-well or a (possibly) multi-well potential, for which two different critical situations may occur, namely, 1. the motion does develop on a small scale in the phase space, being actually restricted within a sole, i.e. the foreseen, potential well, however with dynamical features other than the wanted ones, as it may occur due to any in-well bifurcation of the system dynamics to a different periodic regime or to an aperiodic regime; 258 G. Rega et al. 2. the motion does develop on a large scale in the phase space, i.e. also beyond the invariant manifolds of the hilltop saddle which delimit the working potential well and organize the whole system dynamics. The occurrence of either a single-well or a multiple well has a considerable inﬂu- ence as regards various dynamics, bifurcation, and control issues. 4.10.3 Softening vs. Hardening Systems The distinction between hardening and softening systems reﬂects the intrinsic math- ematical/mechanical character of the system constitutive law and the associated dynamic effects occurring for ﬁnite amplitude motions. It mostly pertains to the large scale motions arising upon the global bifurcation of the hilltop saddle man- ifolds, which can occur in both single-well and multiple-well systems, and it is actually concerned with the kind of out-of-well attractor onto which the system settles down upon overcoming the bounding invariant manifolds, i.e. after escaping from the potential well. Again, two basically different situations can occur. 1. Though being no more restricted within the reference well, the overall system dynamics still remains bounded. This is the case where, after escape, the motion develops entirely within a neighbouring, bounded, well, or it wanders around, e.g., two wells, the reference and a neighbouring one. Scenarios of this kind may occur in multi-well hardening systems and are usually unpleasant from the application viewpoint, yet not destructive. Aperiodic motion scattered between adjacent wells, or the so called cross-well chaos, are indeed classes of motion pertaining to such after-escape non-destructive regimes, and are quite common in several (e.g., two-well Dufﬁng-type [136, 138, 139]) systems. Of course, such kinds of unwanted dynamics may need to be avoided or somehow con- trolled. However, technical situations can be devised wherein realizing alternat- ing dynamic regimes between the reference well and an adjacent one can even be desirable: let us think, e.g., of the shift between oscillating (in-well) and rotat- ing (out-of-well) regimes in a planar pendulum subjected to vertical harmonic (i.e. parametric) excitation of its support [150]. 2. The system dynamics escapes to “inﬁnity”. This is the case where, after escape, the motion is theoretically unbounded, and practically corresponds to the sys- tem settling down onto an attractor far away and completely different from the designed one or, in other terms, to the deﬁnitive system failure. Mechanical situa- tions of reference in this respect are, e.g., the capsizing of a rolling ship in ocean waves [7, 137, 151], the overturning of a rocking rigid block under periodic acceleration of its basement [140, 141], or the pull-in phenomenon occurring in a microelectromechanical system [142] to be used as a resonator or sensor device, which corresponds to the microbeam collapse onto the electrically charged sub- strate. However, there are again technical situations wherein realizing a regime nominally “at inﬁnity” is highly desirable: think, e.g., of the pull-in dynamics of the microbeam in a MEMS to be used as a switch device. Controlling Chaos: The OGY and an Alternative Control Method 259 It is also worth stressing two more meaningful points. (a) Both the two different escape situations just illustrated are actually characterized, from a topological view- point, by a progressive erosion process of either a single in-well basin of attraction or of the whole collection of in-well basins. Yet, the degree of loss of dynamical integrity [146, 147] and the criticality of the ﬁnal outcomes are considerably differ- ent in the two cases. (b) The scenario of bounded/unbounded dynamical regimes of a given system in the excitation parameters space can be inﬂuenced by the occurrence or non-occurrence of a system natural frequency, the former case naturally entail- ing a possibility of resonant excitation condition. This may meaningfully affect the (major or minor) system sensitivity, in terms of loss of dynamical integrity, to the variation of a leading bifurcation parameter. 4.10.4 Homoclinic vs. Heteroclinic Bifurcations As already discussed, the occurrence of a generic underlying bifurcational event, i.e. of the global, homoclinic or heteroclinic, bifurcation of a (possibly) hilltop saddle governing the whole system dynamics (or most of it), is the necessary pre- requisite for developing a generic approach to control – or design – of mechanical systems. Yet, several distinct topological situations do occur for different oscilla- tors. By way of example, in the phase portrait one can have (i) one homoclinic orbit surrounding the unique potential well, like in Helmholtz-type softening oscil- lators [137], (ii) two homoclinic orbits surrounding two separate wells, joined through the intermediate hilltop saddle, like in Dufﬁng-type hardening oscillators [136, 138, 139] – in both cases irrespective of the nature of the system being smooth or non-smooth –, or (iii) one couple of heteroclinic orbits, each one connecting the two organizing hilltop saddles, which surround the unique potential well, like in the Dufﬁng-type softening oscillators or in the rocking block [63, 140, 141]. Of course, more involved phase portraits, characterized by the occurrence of both homoclinic and heteroclinic orbits, may also occur. While in the case of a single (homoclinic) unperturbed manifold there is only one possible global bifurcation corresponding to the tangency of the split perturbed manifolds, in the case of two distinct (either homoclinic or heteroclinic) unperturbed manifolds the global bifurcations can occur either simultaneously or separately, depending on the values of some varying perturbation parameter. And this has very important consequences in terms of control, as we have seen above. It is worth mentioning how, in a given system, the homo/heteroclinic bifurca- tion of the invariant manifolds of an hilltop saddle – i.e, of a globally organizing saddle – does represent the main bifurcational event governing the transition of system dynamics from a small scale to a large scale regime. Yet, as a rule, other local saddles (up to possibly inﬁnitely many) also exist within each potential well, as a consequence of either the instability of a single in-well periodic solution or of the onset of a chaotic saddle born at a previous homo/heteroclinic bifurcation of the coexisting hilltop. Though being secondary bifurcational events, the intersections of the invariant manifolds of a local saddle may also entail meaningful changes of system dynamics, either on the small scale (i.e., in-well) regime or on the large 260 G. Rega et al. scale (i.e., cross-well) regime. The ﬁrst one may correspond, e.g., to the transition from a locally periodic to a locally complex (in-well chaos) response. The second, usually as a consequence of the involvement in the global bifurcational event of also the hilltop saddle due to some heteroclinic connection, may correspond, e.g., to the transition from in-well to cross-well chaos which occurs according to any “turning around” topological mechanism (see, e.g., [152]). Before addressing the control issue in various possible situations, two more dynamical issues, which are also representative of major mechanical differences, are mentioned. 4.10.5 Symmetric vs. Asymmetric Systems The symmetry or asymmetry in the force-displacement relationship of the underly- ing mechanical system do reﬂect themselves in distinguishing features in the poten- tial and the unperturbed phase space of the associated nonlinear oscillators. This distinction deserves attention mostly from a dynamical systems point of view. Focusing on the more “dangerous” softening oscillators, let us think of the difference – under symmetric excitation – between a single-well potential with one escape direction (the smooth Helmholtz oscillator or the non-smooth monolater- ally unconstrained rocking block) or with two asymmetric escape directions (the Helmholtz-Dufﬁng oscillator), on one side, and a single-well potential with two symmetric escape directions (the Dufﬁng oscillator or the bilaterally unconstrained rocking block), on the other side. The solely or prevailing sensitivity to escape ensuing from the asymmetry feature, respectively associated with the occurrence of either one single hilltop saddle or of two hilltop saddles of different energy level, does correspond, in the various cases, to weaker, asymmetric, mechanical features in the background. In contrast, the symmetry entails, e.g., in softening systems – such as the Dufﬁng or the rigid block oscillators – that the potential well is surrounded by a couple of heteroclinic orbits which become a unique heteroclinic loop connecting two equal energy hilltop saddles in the presence of imperfections, whereas in hardening sys- tems – such as the two-well Dufﬁng oscillator – the two homoclinic bifurcations occur simultaneously for all symmetric excitations. Moreover, still thinking in dynamical terms, it must be underlined how, apart from some pathological situations, symmetric oscillators are structurally unstable and can be considered as particular cases of asymmetric oscillators, though they are not always a limit, in an appropriate sense, of the latter (see, e.g., the softening Helmholtz-Dufﬁng equation in [137]). 4.10.6 Transient vs. Steady Dynamics The dynamics, as well as the control, perspectives are quite different depending on whether the mechanical interest in the background technical application is towards the transient or the steady system response. In the problem of ship capsize, for example, it has been emphasised that short-term transient behaviour is particularly Controlling Chaos: The OGY and an Alternative Control Method 261 important [153]. As a matter of fact, there are situations where a temporary escape from the potential well may be unessential for the system operating effectiveness, whereas it has to be strictly avoided in other practical situations. The transient regime is very important and governs the whole system performance in the non- linear dynamics due to short-term excitations (such as those associated with impact forces or seismic loads), while the steady state dynamics are apparently of major interest in the presence of stationary, long-term, excitations. Moreover, the transient regime has obviously as minor importance as shorter it is (like it occurs, e.g., in highly damped systems) while it becomes crucial when it is long (e.g., in highly deformable systems). All of the previous mechanical, bifurcational, and dynamical distinguishing fea- tures have meaningful inﬂuences on the realizable control scenarios. 4.10.7 Overall vs. Localized Control Among various possible categorization perspectives, the broad one in this subsection title basically distinguishes between overall and localized control, and seems to be a rather comprehensive, as well as comparatively useful, one. As a matter of fact, it strictly depends on the two previously addressed, distinct, aspects of the whole problem, namely (i) the main or secondary character of the bifurcational event of interest, and (ii) the large or small scale nature of the ensuing dynamics. As already said, the global bifurcations of the manifolds of a hilltop saddle are main events organizing the system dynamics on a large scale. Nonetheless, in terms of control, a basic distinction does apply as to the possibility (or the interest) to control the global bifurcations, and the ensuing system dynamics, over the whole phase space or just one meaningful part of it. Yet, within this general framework, different situations must be considered. 1. The pursued distinction makes actually full sense only in systems exhibiting (at least) two separate homoclinic orbits, organized by one intermediate hilltop saddle and surrounding two clearly identiﬁed topological regions in the phase space, which correspond to the two potential wells: this is the case, e.g., of the Dufﬁng-type (smooth or non-smooth) hardening oscillators. In such systems, one can aim at controlling only one of the two homoclinic bifurcations, which also entails controlling the dynamics in one clearly identiﬁed part of the phase space: for apparent reasons, this topologically localized control strategy has been termed “one-side control” in Sect. 4.9. Alternatively, one can aim at controlling both the two homoclinic bifurcations, which clearly corresponds to controlling, on average, the dynamics in the whole phase space: this topologically overall control strategy naturally has been termed “global control” in Sect. 4.9. 2. A similar distinction applies to the escape systems which exhibit two separate heteroclinic orbits connecting two organizing hilltop saddles and surrounding a unique potential well: this is the case of the Dufﬁng-type softening oscilla- tor or of the rocking block. Yet, herein, the distinction is considerably weaker from the application viewpoint. Indeed, also in such systems one can aim at 262 G. Rega et al. controlling either only one of the two heteroclinic bifurcations, thus realizing a “one-side control,” or both heteroclinic bifurcations, thus realizing a “global control.” However, the former strategy no more entails controlling the dynamics in one clearly identiﬁed part of the phase space or, in other terms, it no more produces a topologically localized control. What actually happens is that the perturbed heteroclinic loop responsible for complex dynamic phenomena (such as a chaotic saddle and the ensuing horseshoe dynamics) actually breaks down, but the heteroclinic intersection of the non-controlled orbit still allows for the penetration of tongues of the basin of attraction of the inﬁnity into the in-well bounded basins, which may ultimately result in a much earlier system failure. 3. The third case of interest, within the large scale dynamics ensuing from one main bifurcational event, is concerned with all escaping situations characterized by only one homoclinic orbit, which delimits a clearly deﬁned part of the phase space: this is the case of all Helmholtz-type softening oscillators [137]. For con- sistency with the previously adopted terminology, controlling the solely possible homoclinic bifurcation corresponds to realizing a “one-side control,” which in this case actually entails controlling the sole topologically meaningful part of the system phase space. The second distinction between overall and localized control is concerned with the secondary bifurcational events possibly associated with local saddles, and with the ensuing system dynamics. It refers to the possibility, and the interest, to control not so much the global bifurcations of the invariant manifolds of the hilltop saddle organizing the whole dynamics as those of the manifolds of some non-hilltop saddle governing the dynamics within a restricted area of the phase space and making sense in speciﬁc technical situations. Yet, at least two schematically different situations may occur, again. 1. If the secondary event entails the onset of a localized – though possibly com- plex – dynamics on a small scale (e.g., in-well chaos), only the “one-side con- trol” (from the large scale dynamics perspective mentioned at last point 3) can of course be applied. 2. If, on the contrary, due to the involvement of also the hilltop saddle through an heteroclinic connection, the secondary bifurcational event entails a large scale dynamics (think, e.g., of the transition from a single-well to a cross-well chaos in a speciﬁc hardening Dufﬁng oscillator), one can again distinguish between different control strategies (i.e., “global” vs. “one-side”) along the lines previ- ously discussed. Yet, there is a fundamental difference with respect to the hilltop saddle manifolds bifurcation. Indeed, while in this case there can be a very useful chance to develop an analytical, either exact or approximate, treatment [63], no analytical tools are usually available to detect speciﬁc homo/heteroclinic bifurcations of other saddles playing an only locally dominant role in the dynamics. In such cases, the lack of mathematical tools requires adopting a fully numerical approach, wherein both the invariant manifolds and their bifurcations are detected through computer simula- Controlling Chaos: The OGY and an Alternative Control Method 263 tions [136], with obvious restrictions in terms of both generality and applicability of the procedure. 4.10.8 System-Independent vs. System-Dependent Controls With reference to the control scenario on the large scale, it is also worth mentioning some further, very important, control aspects associated with realizing a “one-side” or “global” control as well as with considering hardening symmetric or asymmetric systems. They basically consist in the occurrence of meaningful generic (or sub-universal) features of the mathematical problems of optimization governing the cases of “one- side control” of whatever (softening or hardening) systems and of “global con- trol” of hardening symmetric systems, which also entail very desirable system- independent solutions. This is in contrast with the non-generic optimal “global” con- trol of hardening asymmetric systems, whose solutions are indeed system-dependent and may actually aim at different outcomes of the controlled dynamics, which are strictly associated with the existing asymmetry features. 4.10.9 Finite- vs. Inﬁnite-Dimensional Systems Finally, the very important issue of the ﬁnite- vs. inﬁnite- dimensionality of the system has to be mentioned. The matter was already addressed in Sect. 1, when dwelling on the reliability of the reduced order models usually employed for ana- lyzing the nonlinear dynamics and control of mechanical and structural systems. In the framerwork of the present control method, from a technical point of view, detecting the unwanted global bifurcation may be quite difﬁcult in inﬁnite- dimensional systems, both analytically and numerically, especially because the manifolds are no longer 1D. Referring to a buckled beam with variable boundary conditions, it has been shown [143] how the (minimal) reduced order model is able to provide the same homoclinic bifurcation threshold and the same optimal control as the actual inﬁnite- dimensional system in the background, although this is accomplished in an exact way or with a practically acceptable approximation depending on some problem characteristics. However, in all cases, the correct inﬁnite-dimensional analysis may add useful new resources for control purposes, thus enlarging the potentiality of the method. For example, in inﬁnite-dimensional systems one can determine and use also the “optimal” spatial shape of the controlling excitation, in addition to the optimal temporal one solely obtainable in single d.o.f. systems [143].

Abstract The identiﬁcation of jittered regular signals (=“patterns”) embedded in a noisy background is an important and difﬁcult task, particularly in the neuro- sciences. Traditional methods generally fail to capture such signals. Staircase-like structures in the log–log correlation plot, however, are reliable indicators of such signal components. We provide a number of applications of this method and derive an analytic relationship between the length of the pattern n and the maximal number of steps s(n, m) that are observable at a chosen embedding dimension m. For integer linearly independent patterns and small jitter and noise, the length of the embedded pattern can be calculated from the number of steps. The method is demonstrated to have a huge potential for experimental applications. 1 Introduction and Overview After many years of developing the theoretical fundamentals, dynamical systems have recently started to come up with a rich range of applications, notably in bio- logical systems [1–3]. Characteristic signals of these systems often consist of a mix of regular and noisy signal components. Signals that the neurosciences focus on are the so-called neuronal spike trains, where a neuronal ﬁring event is reduced to a time marker. Since any signal can be characterized by temporal markers, the situa- tion we deal with is a very general one, including, e.g., return-times of dynamical systems and similar observables. Event-marker signals that will serve as illustrative examples in the further development are displayed in Fig. 1. It has been speculated that spike trains from nervous systems, in particular the human brain, fall into this class of mixed regular-noisy signals [4–14]. As a main generation principle, they are believed to originate from neurons that are mostly driven by complex processes, but occasionally get recruited by more locally deﬁned,

Temporal event marker signals. (a) Length-1 pattern (no jitter). (b) Length-5 pattern {40,27,16,9,4,1} (no jitter; pattern will be the guiding example in the main theorem’s proof). (c) Length-6 pattern {5,24,37,44,59} (with random jitter uniformly drawn from [ −6.4,6.4]; pattern is used for Fig. 5d. (d) Length-3 pattern {2,25,10} (no jitter, with 25% of the intervals contributed by random spikes uniformly drawn from [0,100]; pattern is used for Fig. 2b simpler circuits of regular ﬁring. Similar signal characteristics may result from neu- ronal multi-electrode recordings, where signals from different (randomly, regularly, or in a mixed mode ﬁring) sources arrive at an electrode. After spike sorting by which the events of relevance on the time axis are deﬁned, we may be left with regular signal components embedded in a noisy background. Both parts of such signals could play equally important roles in cortical signal processing and computation [15]. Here, however, we will be primarily interested in the regular components and how they can reliably be extracted from the data. Past approaches dealing with this task contained several critical tuning parameters, expressing expectations of how the pattern to be searched for should look like, ren- dering it difﬁcult to assess the validity of the obtained results. This may be one of the reasons why mostly patterns of relatively short length (1–5) have been identiﬁed [7, 10], although it may rightfully be argued that information-bearing signals in neu- roscience cannot be too long, as actions on relatively short time scales are generally required. In [16], a method for a fast and unbiased detection of patterns in noisy contexts was proposed that does not share these shortcomings. The method is based upon the observation that in the presence of patterns, in the correlation integral plots used for the evaluation of fractal dimensions [17–21], step-like structures emerge. The method works with very modest data size of the kind obtainable in most exper- imental contexts in neuroscience, and has, in principle, no pattern length limitation. In the presence of a noisy signal component or jitter, the traditional Fourier method, e.g., quickly fails, whereas the characteristic decrease of the number of steps with the embedding dimension is conserved, even for strong noise components. As the only difference from the noise-free case, the most prominent step reappears in a weakened form at multiples of the pattern length, a phenomenon that is simple Detection of Patterns Within Randomness 273 (a) 100 ISI 0 0 LogIFI2 10 0 –2 –6 –10 (b) 100 ISI 0 0 LogIFI2 10 0 0 –2 –4 (c) 100 ISI 0 0 LogIFI2 10 0 –2 –4 0 ) ε ( ) ( m N C g o l 2 ISI–number 10000 10000 –15 m=1 m=2 –20 –12 m = 3–8 log  ε 2 0 0 ) ε ( ) ( m N C g o l 2 –15 –20 0 ) ε ( ) ( m N C g o l 2 m = 3 –15 log  ε 2 0 m = 3 ISI–number 10000 10000 ISI–number 10000 10000 –15 –20 –15 log  ε 2 0 Fig. 2 Comparison of the proposed method [16] with the Fourier approach, using as a paradigm the pattern {2,25,10} with jitter of ±1 % of the smallest interval. Counter-clockwise: ISI-pattern, power spectrum, log–log plot. (a) Time series constructed of the pattern only: Both methods pre- dict correctly a pattern of length 3 (arrows). (b) Time series composed of (whole) patterns and from intervals uniformly randomly distributed in [0,100], so that 25% of all intervals are random: Fourier fails, whereas the log–log plot shows the characteristic decrease of steps with on large step remaining at dimensions 3–8 (arrow). (c) Same as (b) with now 75% of the spike originating from the random process. Fourier fails, whereas the clearest step at dimension 3 indicates a pattern of length 3 (arrow). See also Figs. 3 and 7 274 R. Stoop and M. Christen to understand along the proof of the main theorem given below. The comparison between our method and the traditional Fourier (power spectrum) approach provided in Fig. 2, illustrates these facts. The derivation of an analytical relationship between pattern length, embedding dimension and number of steps observed, is the main content of this contribution. To make our contribution self-contained, we will proceed as follows. First, we will review the log–log correlation integral method, then point out how the presence of patterns leads to steps in the log–log correlation integral plot, before we arrive at the focus of the present paper, the precise relationship between the length of a pattern embedded in a noisy environment, and the number of maximally identiﬁable log–log steps. For the analytical derivation of the optimally observable number of steps, we will start with patterns of integer linear independence and absence of noise. Because such experimental conditions are generally not met even on a qualitative level, the relationship is formulated in terms of an upper bound on the number of observable steps. 2 Log–log Steps in the Correlation Integral Consider an arbitrary scalar time series of measurements {xi}, i = 1 . . . L. From this data, embedded points ξ (m) are constructed as k ξ (m) k = {xk, xk+1, . . . , xk+(m−1)}, (1) where m is called the embedding dimension [22, 23]. This coordinate-delay con- struction is standard in nonlinear dynamics [19, 20]. Its purpose is to reconstruct the complete underlying (in general: high-dimensional) dynamics from partial, usually scalar, measurements. The reconstruction of the phase space is generically success- ful if for a sufﬁciently large data set a sufﬁciently high embedding dimension is chosen [19, 20]. Using the embedded points, the correlation integral [17, 19–21] is calculated as C(m) N (ε) = 1 N(N − 1) (cid:3) i(cid:6)=j (cid:11) θ ε − * * *ξ (m) i (cid:12) * * * , − ξ (m) j (2) where θ (x) is the Heavyside function (θ (x) = 0 for x ≤ 0 and θ (x) = 1 for x > 0) and N is the number of embedded points (N ≤ L − m + 1). The correlation integral C(m) N (ε) averages the probability of measuring a distance smaller than ε between two randomly chosen points ξ (m) and ξ (m) N (ε) is j plotted against log ε (the so-called log–log plot). The correlation dimension d(m) C is log C(m) deﬁned as the limit d(m) = limε→0 [17, 19, 20]. If an embedding dimen- log ε C sion m > 2d(m) C is chosen, the slope of log C(m) N (ε) versus log ε for small ε provides a good estimate of the correlation dimension. . In practical applications, log C(m) N (ε) i Detection of Patterns Within Randomness 275 For the evaluation of the distances, any norm could be used. Instead of the “nat- ural” Euclidean norm, we will mainly use the maximum norm, in order to simplify numerical computations and theoretical arguments. Degeneracies introduced by this choice are removed upon the addition of a small amount of noise. For an approach extracting fractal dimensions from noisy time series (which is not one of our goals), see [24]. 0 (cid:11) (cid:12) ξ (m) 0 We ﬁrst demonstrate how the presence of patterns leads to a step-like behavior of the log–log correlation dimension plots. Patterns manifest themselves as a clus- N (ε), an embedded point ξ (m) tering of the embedded data. For the calculation of C(m) is chosen at random. As the radius ε of its neighborhood U ,ε is enlarged, we keep track of the number of points that fall into this neighborhood. If a point newly entering the neighborhood belongs to a cluster, upon a small enlargement of ε, many points will join. That is, the number of points C(m) N (ε) quickly increases with ε. Once the cluster size is reached, fewer points are recruited, and C(m) N (ε) increases but slowly. In this way, step-like structures emerge. The denser the clus- tering regions, the more prominent the step-like structure. To demonstrate this effect, artiﬁcial (noise-free) time series were constructed from a repetition of a sequence of length n. The series were then embedded (using embedding dimension m) and the correlation integrals were evaluated. The results shown in Fig. 3 demonstrate a clean emergence of stairs, the number of which increases with the length of the embedded pattern n, and decreases with the embedding dimension m. In the pres- ence of patterns, the step-like behavior emerges stably even for a few hundred scalar measurements. If in an experiment single trials generate less data than needed (say, in neuroscience, because of adaptation), data from several trials under identical con- ditions can be concatenated. Although in this case the embedded data will contain some points that violate the continuous dependence on time, this has normally no statistical inﬂuence. Fig. 3 Correlation integral of time series generated by a repeated sequence of length n. (a) Emergence of steps in the log–log plot of C(m) N (ε)) (m = 2, n = 3, pattern {1, 2, 4}, maximum norm ε rescaled). (b) Decrease of the number of steps with increasing embedding dimension m (m = 1 ,.., 8 , n = 5) 276 R. Stoop and M. Christen The basis of the relationship between number of steps s, pattern length n and embedding dimensions m is provided by the following Proposition. Proposition 1 The number of correlation-dimension log–log steps s(n, m) generated from an embedded repeated pattern, equals the number of distinct distances among the embedded points using the maximum norm. Proof For the correlation integral, all n(n−1) distances between points are calculated, 2 where classes of equal distances {ε1,ε2, . . . ,εκ } are generated. Locally, around a point ξ (m) N (ε,xk) changes whenever ε ∈ {ε1,ε2, . . . ,εκ }. (cid:12) As this is true for any point, also for the averaged correlation integral C(m) ε,ξ (m) N 0 (cid:2) the number of steps is s(n,m) = κ. This proves the proposition. in the embedding space, C(m) (cid:11) 0 3 Noiseless Single Patterns and Beyond After having shown that the presence of patterns is reﬂected in the emergence of log–log correlation integral steps, our next goal is an estimate of the pattern length from the number of steps. That this might be achievable is motivated by the follow- ing argument. Using the maximum norm, the distance between two points in the embedding space is deﬁned as the maximum of the component differences. As the dimensionality of the embedding space is increased, ever more of the possible dif- ferences will be present. A few large differences will, however, prevent the smaller ones from winning the competition for the maximum. As a consequence, the number of steps s(n, m) obtained for a pattern of length n can be expected to decrease with increased embedding dimension m. That this indeed is the case is demonstrated in Fig. 3b. The precise way how this decay proceeds depends on the pattern length n. For toy systems, the maximal number of occurring steps s(n, m) can be com- puted numerically as follows. A time series generated by repeating a sequence of length n composed of elements {x1, . . . , xn}, generates distinct coordinate differ- ences dij: = |xi − xj|. By shifting a window of length m along the time series, we repeatedly generate embedded points of embedding dimension m. On the set of the generated points, the maximum norm induces classes of equal distances, the number of which equals s(n, m). Unfortunately, this numerical calculation quickly exhausts computing time, calling for an analytical way to compute s(n, m). The values of s(n, m) that can be corroborated with the help of a desktop computer are shown in Table 1. In Fig. 7 we demonstrate how for the toy system generated from the sequence {5, 24, 37 44, 59}, the correlation integral method is able to reproduce the decrease of s(n,m) predicted by Table 1: In embedding dimension m = 1, all ten possible differences are detected. As m increases towards 5, the number of steps decreases in accordance with Table 1, before remaining constant for m > 5. In experimental applications, one might expect more than one pattern to be present in a time series. This leads to complications in the application of s(n,m). If, for the simplest case, one single step emerges in the log–log plot, this could either be Detection of Patterns Within Randomness 277 m\n 1 0 1 0 2 0 3 0 4 0 5 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 Table 1 s(n, m) for n, m = 1, . . . ,10 8 3 4 5 6 7 3 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 6 4 3 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 10 8 6 4 2 2 2 2 2 2 15 12 9 7 5 3 3 3 3 3 21 18 15 12 9 6 3 3 3 3 28 24 20 16 13 10 7 4 4 4 9 36 32 28 24 20 16 12 8 4 4 10 45 40 35 30 25 21 17 13 9 5 due to one pattern composed of length two, or to two “patterns” of length one each. A greater number of steps, as obtained from a multitude of patterns, will further complicate this problem. Once the presence of patterns is indicated and precise alternatives for the patterns are posed by the method, the existence/non-existence of a particular alternative, can be corroborated by direct methods that under such conditions are justiﬁed. The number of steps predicted by s(n, m) is reliable up to very strong noise components (this will be demonstrated in Fig. 7) or up to the point where the jitter of the pattern conﬂicts with its nature. Even in very difﬁcult conditions, the method is able to indicate the presence of patterns, where s(n,m) can still serve as a guideline for further processing (see the ﬁnal discussion). 4 Analytical Derivation of s(n, m) For the analytical derivation of s(n, m) we start from a time series {xi}i=1...N gener- ated by the repetition of a pattern of length n. The pattern is supposed to be general in the sense that the elements {x1, . . . , xn} yield n(n − 1)/2 distinct coordinate dif- ferences dij = |xi − xj| (=“integer linear independence”)). Embedded points are generated by the shift of a window of length m along the data series {xi}i=1...N. As was previously pointed out, on the set of the embedded points the maximum norm induces classes of equal distances, the number of which equals s(n, m). The goal of the rest of this paper is to analytically compute s(n, m). We start by calculating the number of different distance vectors. Since different distance vectors will not necessarily imply different distances between points, this is but a preliminary task that can be achieved without specifying the metric. Using this information, we will calculate the number of different distances, specifying the maximum norm as the relevant one. We will focus on the case m ≤ n (case m > n is trivial). As an example of n = 4,m = 3, we start with the repeated sequence {x1, x2, x3, x4}, which generates the time series {x1, x2, x3, x4, x1, x2, x3, x4, x1, x2, x3, x4, x1, x2, ..}. (3) 278 R. Stoop and M. Christen By the embedding process in m = 3, we obtain the set of embedded points {{x1, x2, x3}, {x2, x3, x4}, {x3, x4, x1}, {x4, x1, x2}}. The distance vector components dij between the embedded points then become |{x1, x2, x3} − {x2, x3, x4}| = |{x1 − x2,., x3 − x4}| = :{d12, d23, d34}, |{x2, x3, x4} − {x3, x4, x1}| = |{x2 − x3,., x4 − x1}| = :{d23, d34, d41}, |{x3, x4, x1} − {x4, x1, x2}| = |{x3 − x4,., x1 − x2}| = :{d34, d41, d12}, (4) where | . | indicates the componentwise ‘absolute value’ operation. The emerging distance vectors can be collected in the form of a 2-torus: D(n) = d12 d23 ... d13 d24 · · · d(n−1)n d(n−1)1 dn1 d12 d23 ... dn2 d13 d24 · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · d2n · · · · · · dn(n−2) · · · d2n · · · d1n d21 ... d(n−1)(n−2) dn(n−1) d1n d21 ... · · · d(n−1)n d(n−1)1 d(n−1)2 · · · d(n−1)(n−3) d(n−1)(n−2) · · · . (5) In the distance matrix, distance vectors in an m-dimensional embedding space are represented by sub-columns of dimension m. As an illustration, for n = 5 we obtain D(5) = d12 d13 d14 d15 d23 d24 d25 d21 d34 d35 d31 d32 d45 d41 d42 d43 d51 d52 d53 d54 d12 d13 d14 d15 d23 d24 d25 d21 d34 d35 d31 d32 d45 d41 d42 d43 . Because of the two-torus nature of D, it is no surprise that by starting the columns at arbitrary positions we observe the occurrence of repeated sub-columns (above, locations leading to repetitions are shown in blue), even though we have requested that dij (cid:6)= dkl, unless ij =kl or kl =ji. We will call the upper part of D(n) the top rectangle and the lower part of D(n) the bottom rectangle. In the top rectangle, the triangle deﬁned by the edges d12, d1n and Detection of Patterns Within Randomness 279 d(n−1)(n) will be called the left triangle; the triangle deﬁned by the edges dn1, d21 and dn(n−1) will be called the right triangle (see Fig. 4). It is worthwhile keeping in mind that the indices ij of dij do not reﬂect the position of dij. Using these notations, we will prove the following proposition: Proposition 2 The set of distinct sub-columns of dimension m (m ≤ n arbitrary but ﬁxed) of the difference matrix, is equivalent to the set of sub-columns starting in the left triangle of the difference matrix. Consequently, their number is given by Ω: = n(n − 1) 2 . (6) Proof Sub-columns starting in the left triangle are distinct. We will show that all sub-columns that start in the right triangle or in the bottom rectangle, are equivalent to a sub-column starting in the left triangle. We split the proof into three steps. Due to the construction of the difference matrix, it is obvious that all sub-columns that lie completely inside the bottom rectangle have a counterpart in the top rectangle. Sub-columns starting in the bottom rectangle are therefore repeating sub-columns. Moreover, since dij = dji, all sub-columns that lie completely inside the right trian- gle have a counterpart in the left triangle and therefore are repeating sub-columns. For sub-columns that cross the border between the rectangles and/or between the triangles it sufﬁces to show that all sub-columns starting in the right triangle and crossing the border between top and bottom rectangle, have a counterpart that starts in the left triangle. To this end we consider the borders between rectangles and triangles (border T and border B, and border L and border R, respectively, see Fig. 4). Since dij = dji, the elements of border R (dn,1, . . . , d2,1) reappear at the border B (d1,2, . . . , d1,n), in reversed order. Also the elements of border L (dn−1,n, . . . ,d1,n) appear at the border T (dn,1, . . . , dn,n−1), also in reversed order. Sub-columns starting in the right triangle and crossing from T to B have always a counterpart sub-column starting in the left triangle and crossing from L to R. subcolumn border L border R border T border B left triangle right triangle top rectangle bottom rectangle Fig. 4 Partition of the difference matrix (see text) 280 R. Stoop and M. Christen For all sub-columns that either start in the right or in the bottom rectangle, there is therefore a sub-column starting in the left triangle. Consequently, the set of distinct sub-columns can be obtained by counting the sub-columns of the left triangle, the number of which evaluates to n(n−1) (cid:2) . This proves the proposition. 2 It has already been pointed out that distinct sub-columns do not necessarily imply distinct point distances. To count the number of distinct distances we will use the maximum norm, which considerably simpliﬁes the arguments. Evaluation of the maximum norm amounts to the determination of the largest element from the sub- column. As the differences dij are all distinct, they can be ordered according to size, with ¯dij denoting the largest element. For m ≥ 2, ¯dij will appear in several distinct sub-columns that all lead to the same distance. Moreover, the explicit decrease of s(n,m), for n ﬁxed and m increasing, depends on the speciﬁc order of the dij in the difference matrix. Therefore, only an upper bound s(n,m) of the number of distinct distances can be given. To determine this bound we consider an order of dij that maximizes the number of observable steps. Proposition 3 The number of distinct distances between the embedded points is maximal if the elements of the columns in the left triangle are monotonously decreas- ing (increasing) d12 ∨ d23 ∨ ... ∨ · · · d1(n−1) d1n d13 ∨ · · · ∨ · · · d2n d24 ∨ · · · ... ... ∨ d(n−2)(n−1) d(n−2)n ∨ d(n−1)n . (7) Proof It sufﬁces to prove Proposition 3 for monotonously decreasing distance ele- ments. First we will show that there exists a sequence (a1, . . . ,an) with the required ordering of the differences. Then we will show that this ordering leads to a maximal number of distinct distances. We proceed by construction: For the series an−ι = 2ι for ι = l , . . . , n − 1, we obtain distinct nonzero differences dij = |ai − aj|. For two consecutive elements in the l-th column of the left triangle, we obtain dn−(ι+1), n−(ι+1−l) − dn−ι, n−(ι−l) = |an−(ι+1) − an−(ι+1−l)| − |an−ι − an−(ι−l)| = ι−l − 1)| = ι+1−l − 1)| − |(2 ι − 1) − (2 |(2 ι+1 − 1) − (2 (8) Detection of Patterns Within Randomness 281 ι(cid:3) ι−1(cid:3) 2p = 2p − p=ι−l+1 p=ι−l ι − 2 2 ι−l > 0. The constructed sequence therefore has the desired ordering within column l. By construction, the elements dij of the difference matrix are distinct and nonzero, so that they can be ordered according to size. We ﬁrst focus on sub-columns that lie entirely within the left triangle. We will show that for a maximal number of distinct point distances, ¯dij of each column must be located in the ﬁrst row. Consider in the left triangle a column l and assume that ¯dij is in row i, with 1 < i ≤ n − l. Then, for 2 ≤ m ≤ i, there are up to m sub-columns starting in row i−m+1 and lying completely in the left triangle, that include ¯dij. As a consequence, they will generate the identical (maximal) distance. Only when ¯dij is located in the ﬁrst position of column l, it will be in precisely one sub-column, and the number of distinct distances will be maximal, see Fig. 5a. In order to generate a maximal number of distances, the elements dij must therefore have the requested ordering. We now consider sub-columns that start in the left triangle but extend to the right triangle and possibly also to the bottom rectangle (see Fig. 4). Again, the number of distinct distances would be maximal, if all elements in every row of the difference matrix would take over the ordering of the top triangle. Unfortunately, this is not possible, since there are constraints among the elements of the matrix. However, the desired ordering of the elements dij can also be achieved in the columns of the right triangle, since dij = dji. Moreover, if we only consider sub-columns starting in the left triangle with dimension is not larger than m, the desired ordering is also be achieved by the sub-column elements of the bottom rectangle, since in this part of the bottom rectangle, the left triangle is repeated. The obstruction against the desired monotonous decrease of dij emerges at the borders {T, B} and {L, R}. We will show that despite these potential disruptions of the ordering, the number of distinct distances between the embedded points will be maximal. We deal with the two borders separately. For reasons of simplicity, we ﬁrst deal with the {T, B}-border, considering later the impact of an additional disruption of the monotonous ordering at the {L, R}- border. By construction of the matrix, the biggest element ¯dij of a column in the left triangle will show up again in the bottom rectangle, so that in each column at some point, the monotonous decrease of the values dij will be disrupted. If the order of the elements dij is according to the Proposition 3, the disruption happens at the {T, B}-border. We argue that despite this disruption, the ordering to the Proposition 3 will be optimal. Consider a column l of the left triangle with largest element ¯dij. This ele- ment will repeat in the bottom rectangle. Independently of the position of ¯dij in the left triangle, the number of intermediate dij between the two locations ¯dij is n − 1. An element ¯dij in the bottom rectangle can therefore only be part of a sub-column, if the latter’s dimension m is large enough (except for the ﬁrst few columns of the 282 R. Stoop and M. Christen (a) (b) Fig. 5 Illustration of the proof of Proposition 3 (pointsize represents size of dij): (a) If the order- ing of the elements of the difference matrix is according to the proposition, each location of a sub-column of dimension 3 results in a new distance. If, however, the largest element is placed in the third place, all sub-columns result in the same distance. (b) The disruption of the monotonous decrease at the border {T, B} only affects sub-columns of a large dimension m (in the given exam- ple, for m = 6 only one distance each for the optimal and the suboptimal case). For sub-columns with smaller m, the ordering within the left triangle is relevant (for m = 5 in the given example we obtain two distances in the optimal case, and one in the suboptimal case). The distinction of the cases is similar to the one expressed by k (Eq. (10)) difference matrix). Therefore, the position of ¯dij in the left triangle is crucial in order to maximize the number of distinct distances. As has been shown before, in order to achieve this, ¯dij needs to be at the ﬁrst position in the column (see Fig. 5b). A monotonous decrease of dij beyond the {L,R}-border would require all of the following inequalities to be fulﬁlled: d(n−1)n > dn1, d(n−2)n > d(n−1)1, . . . , d1n > d21. (9) Due to the dependencies between the element of the matrix, this cannot be satisﬁed. Consider for example the ﬁrst and the last column of the top rectangle. From a monotonous decrease in the last column of the top rectangle it would follow that d1n > dn(n−1), contradicting the ﬁrst inequality. Continuing in this way by com- paring the second column with the second-last column, etc., it becomes obvious that in the chain of inequalities (9), either the ﬁrst or the second part of the chain can be fulﬁlled, but not both of them. Since the left triangle sub-columns starting in the ﬁrst columns contain more {T,B}-border elements than those starting in the last columns, for obtaining a maximal number of distinct distances, the fulﬁllment Detection of Patterns Within Randomness 283 of the second part of (9) should be aimed at. This is achieved by the proposed ordering. The distinction between the two cases is given by the row number k such that the top sub-rectangle containing the ﬁrst k rows is monotonously ordered. k is evaluated as # k = n/2 (n − 1)/2 : : even n odd n . (10)

This proves the proposition. (cid:2) As an example consider the repeated pattern generated from the sequence (40,27, 16,9,4,1) (n = 6) with distance matrix 13 24 31 36 39 11 18 23 26 13 7 12 15 24 11 5 8 31 18 7 3 36 23 12 5 39 26 15 8 3 13 24 31 36 39 11 18 23 26 13 7 12 15 24 11 5 8 31 18 7 3 36 23 12 5 . For this pattern, from Eq. (10) we obtain k = 3, implying a monotonous behav- ior in the ﬁrst three (sub)columns of the left triangle {13,11,7,5,3}, {24,18,12,8}, {31,23,15}, and in the last two columns of the top rectangle {36,26,24,18,12,8}, {39,13,11,7,5,3}. Elements of the left triangle are in bold type. Proposition 4 Given an embedded time series generated from a repeated pattern (x1, . . . ,xn). If the ordering of the associated difference matrix in the left triangle is according to Proposition 3, the number of distinct distances will be maximal and given by s(n, m) = Ω − Λ + Π − Υ + Γ , where = k(m − 1), (11) (12) + = i(i + 1) 2 where n even: i = m − k − 1 if m > k + 1 else n odd: i = m − k − 2 if m > k + 2 else i = 0 i = 0, 284 R. Stoop and M. Christen # # ϒ = - = i(i+1) 2 0 if m > k + 2 and else, 1 n:even ∧ m > k 0 else. i = m − k − 2 2 Proof For the calculation, we start from the number of distinct difference sequences that start in the left triangle Ω = n(n−1) (Eq. (6)), among which, however, there will be some multiply generated distances. If the elements dij are ordered accord- ing to Proposition 3, obvious multiply generated distances are those from 1, . . . , k- subcolums crossing the {L,R}-borders, because in each column of the top rectangle, the R-border elements provide the largest elements. Therefore, most sub-columns starting in the ﬁrst k columns of the left triangle and containing elements of the R-border yield distances identical to those from sub-columns starting in the columns k+1, . . . , n−1. By the term “most” we indicate, that for n even and m > k, a special case needs to be analyzed (to be included in the term Γ , see below). Similarly, for k + 1, . . . , n − 1, the B-border elements provide the largest components. : In order to count the number of sub-columns of dimension m containing ele- ments of the left triangle as well as R-border elements, we ﬁrst also accept sub- columns of dimension m that potentially ’stick out’ of the matrix (see Fig. 6a). The number of these dij-positions covered is  : = k(m − 1), with k as in Proposition 3, Eq. (10). The equal number of subcolums (starting at these positions) does not lead to new distances and therefore needs to be subtracted from Ω. +: In   we also counted a number + of virtual sub-columns (that “stick out” of the matrix and are therefore of a virtual nature). Their number depends on whether (a) (b) Fig. 6 Proposition 4 illustrated: (a) Counting subcolumnns crossing the {L, R}- and {T, B}-borders: counts subcolumns until column k that contain elements of the R border, including some “stick-out” subcolumns. Expression + counts the number of stick-out subcolumns. Circles mark the positions of non-existing subcolumns (n = m = 7). ϒ counts the subcolumns in column k + 1 that cross the {T, B}-border. Larger subcolumn elements are indicated by larger dots. (b) Special case accounted for by -. For n = 6, the subcolumns in the k’th column with dimension m > 3 generates a distinct distance, whereas for n = 7, the subcolumn of dimension m > 4 fails to do so. Open circles: Locations of the two elements of identical largest size. For n even they are in the same column d1(k+1) Detection of Patterns Within Randomness 285 2 n is even or odd. One easily derives that + has the value + = i(i+1) , where for even n, i = m − k − 1 (and m > k + 1), and for odd n, i = m − k − 2 (and m > k + 2). This number has to be added to Ω − Λ. ϒ: Now we consider sub-columns starting from the left triangle of columns with numbers k + 1, . . . ,n − 1. In these columns, a monotonous decrease of dij can be achieved until the {T,B}-border is reached. Therefore, sub-columns starting in columns l = k + 1, . . . ,n − 1 of the left triangle containing B-border elements yield a distance already obtained by sub-columns starting from the ﬁrst row in column l (see Fig. 6a). Thus, their number is ϒ = i(i+1) , where i = m − k − 2 and m > k + 2. 2 ϒ needs to be subtracted from Ω −   + +. -: Finally, we take into account the special case n even and m > k. Due to construction, the largest element in the k-th matrix row is the element d1(k+1), which appears in row number 1 and k + 1. Sub-columns starting in the left triangle with m ≥ k + 1 therefore all yield the same distance (see Fig. 6b). This shortcoming can be compensated for by a term -: = 1 for even n and m > k and Γ : = 0 else. Γ has to be added to Ω − Λ + Π − Υ . We now have taken into account all sub-columns crossing the {L, R}- and the {T,B}-border in the difference matrix, showing which one of them generate already (cid:2) generated distances. This proves the proposition. Proposition 5 For m > n, the number of distinct distances equals s(n,m = n) (and is therefore independent from m). Proof Consider sub-columns of length m = n starting in the left triangle. Due to the periodicity of the sequence (a1, . . . ,an), for m > n, dij-elements entering a sub- column from below are already contained in the sub-column. Therefore, no new maximal dij can enter these sub-columns, so that s(n,m) cannot change any more. (cid:2)

This proves the proposition. 5 Main Theorem Collecting all terms, we arrive at the following result: The maximal number of steps s(n,m) emerging in a log-log plot of a time series from a repeated pattern of length n in embedding space dimension m has the expression n even: s(n,m) = n odd: s(n,m) = ⎧ ⎨ ⎩ # n(n−m) 2 n(n−m)+2m−n 2 n 2 1 ≤ m ≤ n : 2 < m ≤ n n : 2 : m > n, n(n−m)+m−1 2 n−1 2 1 ≤ m ≤ n : : m > n (13) (14) 286 R. Stoop and M. Christen Using this analytic expression, we obtain the table of the maximal number of observable steps s(n,m) as presented in Table 1. 6 Discussion and Outlook We have investigated how the number of steps s emerging in the log–log correlation integral plot of time series generated from repeated patterns depends on the the length of the pattern n and the embedding dimension m. We were able to derive and prove an analytical relationship between the three quantities. That this relation- ship continues to hold for mixed noise-pattern signals, for noise components where alternative methods fail or are inconclusive, has been demonstrated in Fig. 2. Up to strong noise components, the derived formula allows for a direct determination of the pattern length (and the associated length scales) if only one integer linearly independent pattern is present in the time series. As in applications these conditions may be violated or difﬁcult to verify (e.g. more than one pattern might be present), the result was formulated as a statement on the maximal number of observable steps. A ﬁnal point of interest not discussed so far is the inﬂuence of jitter on the repeated patterns. In general, jitter modiﬁes the density of the point clusters in the embedding space and, therefore, the distribution of the distances. In the log-log plot this primarily leads to a smearing of the steps (some consequences thereof have already been investigated in [16]). A pattern will always emerge in the embedded time series in its most genuine form (it is neither cut into pieces, nor spoiled by foreign points) if the embedding dimension equals the pattern length (n = m). In the case of absence of a noise component, the decrease of steps fully stops at n = m, whereas in the presence of a noise component, the steps repeat at multiples of n, in a softened fashion. As a consequence, the most prominent step can be expected to yield a reliable indicator of the pattern length. That this is indeed the case is demonstrated in our ﬁnal example, where to the series generated from the sequence {5,24,37,44,59} (cf. Table 1), jitter was added. For the following, we deﬁne the strength of the jitter as the ratio of the interval size from which we uniformly sample the jitter, over the shortest interval of the pattern. The results (Fig. 7b–f) demonstrate that the pattern length can be reliably estimated up to a jitter strength of 512% (Fig. 7e), as the most pronounced step still appears at m = 5. The number of steps for m < 5, however, are affected by the jitter: For m = 1, for example, 9 steps are identiﬁable at 8% jitter (Fig. 7b), 7 steps at 32% (Fig. 7c) and 3 steps at 128% (Fig. 7d). The step-like structure disappears if the jitter reaches the size of the largest element of the pattern (Fig. 7f). Thus, the criterion that the most pronounced step appears at m = n, still yields a valuable indicator for the pattern length at strong jitter. In experimental applications, one might have more than one pattern in a time series. This complicates the expression for s(n, m). If, for the simplest case, one single step emerges in the log–log correlation integral plot, this could either be due to one pattern composed of length two, or to two “patterns” of length one each. Detection of Patterns Within Randomness 287 100 (a) (b) (c) ISI 0 0 0 ) ε ( ) ( m N C 2 g o l –3 100 (d) ISI 0 0 0 ) ε ( ) ( m N C g o l 2 ISI–number 100000 m = 1 m = 2 m = 3 m = 4 m = 5–8 ISI–number 10000 (e) (f) –3 –4 log  ε 2 0 –4 log  ε 2 0 –4 log  ε 2 0 Fig. 7 Step number decrease with increasing embedding dimension, in the presence of background noise (n = 5, m = 1, . . . ,8). Upper row: ISI pattern, lower row: log-log plots (a) For m = 1 we ﬁnd 10 steps, in agreement with Table 1. Panels (b)-f): Noise levels 8, 32, 128, 512 and 1,024%. Despite the step number decrease, the clearest step always emerges for n = 5, indicating the presence of a pattern of length 5 288 R. Stoop and M. Christen A greater number of steps, as obtained from a multitude of patterns, further com- plicates the situation. Fortunately, even in this case, the method is able to provide the correct information on the length of the ingredients for a mixture of linearly independent patterns, notably even in the presence of very general kinds of back- ground noise [16]. For covering these non-optimal cases and conditions, the Main Theorem was formulated as a statement on the maximal number of observable steps for a repeated pattern. It is worth emphasizing that once the presence of patterns is evident and suggestions of patterns have been obtained by our method, their existence/non-existence can be conﬁrmed by direct methods. If based on the insight provided by our method, the direct methods are better justiﬁed and more efﬁcient. To illustrate the potential of the approach, we brieﬂy mention one recent exper- imental application.1 In this experiment, motor neuron re-aggregates of spherical extension of 120–150 μm size were cultivated on a 2-D micro-electrode array, where the spacing between electrodes is 200 μm and the electrode diameter is 30 μm. The neurons form a network, of which the electrodes acquire the extracellular potentials ﬂuctuations (Fig. 8a). On the other side of the chip, muscle cells are cultivated. Applying our approach to spike trains derived from extracellular potentials data, we found that during in vitro day 3, at one particular electrode a pattern of length 5 was present (Fig. 8b). At all other investigated electrodes, in contrast, only noisy signals were detected (Fig. 8c). The ﬁring frequency at the pattern generating site was signiﬁcantly lower than the frequencies at the other electrodes. After day 5, the pattern vanished. These ﬁndings suggest that a potential for a pattern generator is initially built up at this site, but then is discarded during further development. Experimental efforts now attempt to clarify the origin of the pattern generator and its conditions of sustainability. In our contribution, we have unvealed how patterns account for the emergence of steps in Log–log correlation integrals plots. Moreover, we have shown that these steps provide the basis for an efﬁcient and robust identiﬁcation of patterns present within noise, on all scales of the signal, where the latter property is facilitated Motor neuron re-aggregates of spherical extension of 120–150 μm, cultivated on a 2-D micro-electrode array.