Set theory is the branch of mathematical logic that studies sets, which can be informally described as collections of objects. Although objects of any kind can be collected into a set, set theory – as a branch of mathematics – is mostly concerned with those that are relevant to mathematics as a whole.
The modern study of set theory was initiated by the German mathematicians Richard Dedekind and Georg Cantor in the 1870s. In particular, Georg Cantor is commonly considered the founder of set theory. The non-formalized systems investigated during this early stage go under the name of naive set theory. After the discovery of paradoxes within naive set theory (such as Russell's paradox, Cantor's paradox and the Burali-Forti paradox), various axiomatic systems were proposed in the early twentieth century, of which Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory (with or without the axiom of choice) is still the best-known and most studied.
Set theory is commonly employed as a foundational system for the whole of mathematics, particularly in the form of Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory with the axiom of choice. Besides its foundational role, set theory also provides the framework to develop a mathematical theory of infinity, and has various applications in computer science (such as in the theory of relational algebra), philosophy, formal semantics, and evolutionary dynamics. Its foundational appeal, together with its paradoxes, and its implications for the concept of infinity and its multiple applications have made set theory an area of major interest for logicians and philosophers of mathematics. Contemporary research into set theory covers a vast array of topics, ranging from the structure of the real number line to the study of the consistency of large cardinals.
The basic notion of grouping objects has existed since at least the emergence of numbers, and the notion of treating sets as their own objects has existed since at least the Tree of Porphyry in 3rd-century AD. The simplicity and ubiquity of sets makes it hard to determine the origin of sets as now used in mathematics; however, Bernard Bolzano's Paradoxes of the Infinite (Paradoxien des Unendlichen, 1851) is generally considered the first rigorous introduction of sets to mathematics. In his work, he (among other things) expanded on Galileo's paradox, and introduced one-to-one correspondence of infinite sets, for example between the intervals
[ 0 , 5 ] and [ 0 , 12 ] by the relation 5 y = 12 x . However, he resisted saying these sets were equinumerous, and his work is generally considered to have been uninfluential in mathematics of his time.
Before mathematical set theory, basic concepts of infinity were considered to be in the domain of philosophy (see: Infinity (philosophy) and Infinity § History). Since the 5th century BC, beginning with Greek philosopher Zeno of Elea in the West (and early Indian mathematicians in the East), mathematicians had struggled with the concept of infinity. With the development of calculus in the late 17th century, philosophers began to generally distinguish between potential and actual infinity, wherein mathematics was only considered in the latter. Carl Friedrich Gauss famously stated: Infinity is nothing more than a figure of speech which helps us talk about limits. The notion of a completed infinity doesn't belong in mathematics.Development of mathematical set theory was motivated by several mathematicians. Bernhard Riemann's lecture On the Hypotheses which lie at the Foundations of Geometry (1854) proposed new ideas about topology. His lectures also introduced the concept of basing mathematics in terms of sets or manifolds in the sense of a class (which he called Mannigfaltigkeit) now called point-set topology. The lecture was published by Richard Dedekind in 1868, along with Riemann's paper on trigonometric series (which presented the Riemann integral). The latter was the starting point for a movement in real analysis of the study of “seriously” discontinuous functions. A young Georg Cantor entered into this area, which led him to the study of point-sets. Around 1871, influenced by Riemann, Dedekind began working with sets in his publications, which dealt very clearly and precisely with equivalence relations, partitions of sets, and homomorphisms. Thus, many of the usual set-theoretic procedures of twentieth-century mathematics go back to his work. However, he did not publish a formal explanation of his set theory until 1888.
Set theory, as understood by modern mathematicians, is generally considered to be founded by a single paper in 1874 by Georg Cantor titled On a Property of the Collection of All Real Algebraic Numbers. In his paper, he developed the notion of cardinality, comparing the sizes of two sets by setting them in one-to-one correspondence. His "revolutionary discovery" was that the set of all real numbers is uncountable, that is, one cannot put all real numbers in a list. This theorem is proved using Cantor's first uncountability proof, which differs from the more familiar proof using his diagonal argument.
Cantor introduced fundamental constructions in set theory, such as the power set of a set A, which is the set of all possible subsets of A. He later proved that the size of the power set of A is strictly larger than the size of A, even when A is an infinite set; this result soon became known as Cantor's theorem. Cantor developed a theory of transfinite numbers, called cardinals and ordinals, which extended the arithmetic of the natural numbers. His notation for the cardinal numbers was the Hebrew letter
ℵ (ℵ, aleph) with a natural number subscript; for the ordinals he employed the Greek letter
ω (ω, omega). Set theory was beginning to become an essential ingredient of the new “modern” approach to mathematics. Originally, Cantor's theory of transfinite numbers was regarded as counter-intuitive – even shocking. This caused it to encounter resistance from mathematical contemporaries such as Leopold Kronecker and Henri Poincaré and later from Hermann Weyl and L. E. J. Brouwer, while Ludwig Wittgenstein raised philosophical objections (see: Controversy over Cantor's theory).
Despite the controversy, Cantor's set theory gained remarkable ground around the turn of the 20th century with the work of several notable mathematicians and philosophers. Richard Dedekind, around the same time, began working with sets in his publications, and was famously constructing the real numbers in 1872 using Dedekind cuts. Cantor and Dedekind were in correspondence about set theory, especially in the 1870s. However, Dedekind's algebraic style only began to find followers in the 1890s. Cantor also worked with Giuseppe Peano in developing the Peano axioms, which formalized natural-number arithmetic, using set-theoretic ideas, which also introduced the epsilon symbol for set membership. Possibly most prominently, Gottlob Frege began to develop his Foundations of Arithmetic.
In his work, Frege tries to ground all mathematics in terms of logical axioms using Cantor's cardinality. For example, the sentence "the number of horses in the barn is four" means that four objects fall under the concept horse in the barn. Frege attempted to explain our grasp of numbers through cardinality ('the number of...', or
N x : F x ), relying on Hume's principle.
However, Frege's work was short-lived, as it was found by Bertrand Russell that his axioms lead to a contradiction. Specifically, Frege's Basic Law V (now known as the axiom schema of unrestricted comprehension). According to Basic Law V, for any sufficiently well-defined property, there is the set of all and only the objects that have that property. The contradiction, called Russell's paradox, is shown as follows:Let R be the set of all sets that are not members of themselves. (This set is sometimes called "the Russell set".) If R is not a member of itself, then its definition entails that it is a member of itself; yet, if it is a member of itself, then it is not a member of itself, since it is the set of all sets that are not members of themselves. The resulting contradiction is Russell's paradox. In symbols:
Let R = { x ∣ x ∉ x } , then R ∈ R ⟺ R ∉ R This came around a time of several paradoxes or counter-intuitive results. For example, that the parallel postulate cannot be proved, the existence of mathematical objects that cannot be computed or explicitly described, and the existence of theorems of arithmetic that cannot be proved with Peano arithmetic. The result was a foundational crisis of mathematics.
Set theory begins with a fundamental binary relation between an object o and a set A. If o is a member (or element) of A, the notation o ∈ A is used. A set is described by listing elements separated by commas, or by a characterizing property of its elements, within braces { }. Since sets are objects, the membership relation can relate sets as well, i.e., sets themselves can be members of other sets.
A derived binary relation between two sets is the subset relation, also called set inclusion. If all the members of set A are also members of set B, then A is a subset of B, denoted A ⊆ B. For example, {1, 2} is a subset of {1, 2, 3}, and so is {2} but {1, 4} is not. As implied by this definition, a set is a subset of itself. For cases where this possibility is unsuitable or would make sense to be rejected, the term proper subset is defined, variously denoted
A ⊂ B , A ⊊ B , or A ⫋ B (note however that the notation
A ⊂ B is sometimes used synonymously with
A ⊆ B ; that is, allowing the possibility that A and B are equal). We call A a proper subset of B if and only if A is a subset of B, but A is not equal to B. Also, 1, 2, and 3 are members (elements) of the set {1, 2, 3}, but are not subsets of it; and in turn, the subsets, such as {1}, are not members of the set {1, 2, 3}. More complicated relations can exist; for example, the set {1} is both a member and a proper subset of the set {1, {1}}.
Just as arithmetic features binary operations on numbers, set theory features binary operations on sets. The following is a partial list of them:
Union of the sets A and B, denoted A ∪ B, is the set of all objects that are a member of A, or B, or both. For example, the union of {1, 2, 3} and {2, 3, 4} is the set {1, 2, 3, 4}.
Intersection of the sets A and B, denoted A ∩ B, is the set of all objects that are members of both A and B. For example, the intersection of {1, 2, 3} and {2, 3, 4} is the set {2, 3}.
Set difference of U and A, denoted U ∖ A, is the set of all members of U that are not members of A. The set difference {1, 2, 3} ∖ {2, 3, 4}  is {1}, while conversely, the set difference {2, 3, 4} ∖ {1, 2, 3} is {4}. When A is a subset of U, the set difference U ∖ A is also called the complement of A in U. In this case, if the choice of U is clear from the context, the notation Ac is sometimes used instead of U ∖ A, particularly if U is a universal set as in the study of Venn diagrams.
Symmetric difference of sets A and B, denoted A △ B or A ⊖ B, is the set of all objects that are a member of exactly one of A and B (elements which are in one of the sets, but not in both). For instance, for the sets {1, 2, 3} and {2, 3, 4}, the symmetric difference set is {1, 4}. It is the set difference of the union and the intersection, (A ∪ B) ∖ (A ∩ B) or (A ∖ B) ∪ (B ∖ A).
Cartesian product of A and B, denoted A × B, is the set whose members are all possible ordered pairs (a, b), where a is a member of A and b is a member of B. For example, the Cartesian product of {1, 2} and {red, white} is {(1, red), (1, white), (2, red), (2, white)}.
Some basic sets of central importance are the set of natural numbers, the set of real numbers and the empty set – the unique set containing no elements. The empty set is also occasionally called the null set, though this name is ambiguous and can lead to several interpretations. The empty set can be denoted with empty braces "
{ } " or the symbol " ∅ " or " ∅ ". The power set of a set A, denoted
P ( A ) , is the set whose members are all of the possible subsets of A. For example, the power set of {1, 2} is { {}, {1}, {2}, {1, 2} }. Notably,
P ( A ) contains both A and the empty set.
A set is pure if all of its members are sets, all members of its members are sets, and so on. For example, the set containing only the empty set is a nonempty pure set. In modern set theory, it is common to restrict attention to the von Neumann universe of pure sets, and many systems of axiomatic set theory are designed to axiomatize the pure sets only. There are many technical advantages to this restriction, and little generality is lost, because essentially all mathematical concepts can be modeled by pure sets. Sets in the von Neumann universe are organized into a cumulative hierarchy, based on how deeply their members, members of members, etc. are nested. Each set in this hierarchy is assigned (by transfinite recursion) an ordinal number
α , known as its rank. The rank of a pure set
X is defined to be the least ordinal that is strictly greater than the rank of any of its elements. For example, the empty set is assigned rank 0, while the set containing only the empty set is assigned rank 1. For each ordinal
α , the set V α is defined to consist of all pure sets with rank less than
α . The entire von Neumann universe is denoted
V . Elementary set theory can be studied informally and intuitively, and so can be taught in primary schools using Venn diagrams. The intuitive approach tacitly assumes that a set may be formed from the class of all objects satisfying any particular defining condition. This assumption gives rise to paradoxes, the simplest and best known of which are Russell's paradox and the Burali-Forti paradox. Axiomatic set theory was originally devised to rid set theory of such paradoxes.
The most widely studied systems of axiomatic set theory imply that all sets form a cumulative hierarchy. Such systems come in two flavors, those whose ontology consists of:
Sets alone. This includes the most common axiomatic set theory, Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory with the axiom of choice (ZFC). Fragments of ZFC include:
Zermelo set theory, which replaces the axiom schema of replacement with that of separation;
General set theory, a small fragment of Zermelo set theory sufficient for the Peano axioms and finite sets;
Kripke–Platek set theory, which omits the axioms of infinity, powerset, and choice, and weakens the axiom schemata of separation and replacement.
Sets and proper classes. These include Von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel set theory, which has the same strength as ZFC for theorems about sets alone, and Morse–Kelley set theory and Tarski–Grothendieck set theory, both of which are stronger than ZFC.
The above systems can be modified to allow urelements, objects that can be members of sets but that are not themselves sets and do not have any members. Zermelo set theory was originally defined over a domain consisting of both sets and urelements.
The New Foundations systems of NFU (allowing urelements) and NF (lacking them), associate with Willard Van Orman Quine, are not based on a cumulative hierarchy. NF and NFU include a "set of everything", relative to which every set has a complement. In these systems urelements matter, because NF, but not NFU, produces sets for which the axiom of choice does not hold. Despite NF's ontology not reflecting the traditional cumulative hierarchy and violating well-foundedness, Thomas Forster has argued that it does reflect an iterative conception of set.
Systems of constructive set theory, such as CST, CZF, and IZF, embed their set axioms in intuitionistic instead of classical logic. Yet other systems accept classical logic but feature a nonstandard membership relation. These include rough set theory and fuzzy set theory, in which the value of an atomic formula embodying the membership relation is not simply True or False. The Boolean-valued models of ZFC are a related subject.
An enrichment of ZFC called internal set theory was proposed by Edward Nelson in 1977.
Many mathematical concepts can be defined precisely using only set theoretic concepts. For example, mathematical structures as diverse as graphs, manifolds, rings, vector spaces, and relational algebras can all be defined as sets satisfying various (axiomatic) properties. Equivalence and order relations are ubiquitous in mathematics, and the theory of mathematical relations can be described in set theory.
Set theory is also a promising foundational system for much of mathematics. Since the publication of the first volume of Principia Mathematica, it has been claimed that most (or even all) mathematical theorems can be derived using an aptly designed set of axioms for set theory, augmented with many definitions, using first or second-order logic. For example, properties of the natural and real numbers can be derived within set theory, as each of these number systems can be defined by representing their elements as sets of specific forms.
Set theory as a foundation for mathematical analysis, topology, abstract algebra, and discrete mathematics is likewise uncontroversial; mathematicians accept (in principle) that theorems in these areas can be derived from the relevant definitions and the axioms of set theory. However, it remains that few full derivations of complex mathematical theorems from set theory have been formally verified, since such formal derivations are often much longer than the natural language proofs mathematicians commonly present. One verification project, Metamath, includes human-written, computer-verified derivations of more than 12,000 theorems starting from ZFC set theory, first-order logic and propositional logic.
Set theory is a major area of research in mathematics with many interrelated subfields:
Combinatorial set theory concerns extensions of finite combinatorics to infinite sets. This includes the study of cardinal arithmetic and the study of extensions of Ramsey's theorem such as the Erdős–Rado theorem.
Descriptive set theory is the study of subsets of the real line and, more generally, subsets of Polish spaces. It begins with the study of pointclasses in the Borel hierarchy and extends to the study of more complex hierarchies such as the projective hierarchy and the Wadge hierarchy. Many properties of Borel sets can be established in ZFC, but proving these properties hold for more complicated sets requires additional axioms related to determinacy and large cardinals.
The field of effective descriptive set theory is between set theory and recursion theory. It includes the study of lightface pointclasses, and is closely related to hyperarithmetical theory. In many cases, results of classical descriptive set theory have effective versions; in some cases, new results are obtained by proving the effective version first and then extending ("relativizing") it to make it more broadly applicable.
A recent area of research concerns Borel equivalence relations and more complicated definable equivalence relations. This has important applications to the study of invariants in many fields of mathematics.
In set theory as Cantor defined and Zermelo and Fraenkel axiomatized, an object is either a member of a set or not. In fuzzy set theory this condition was relaxed by Lotfi A. Zadeh so an object has a degree of membership in a set, a number between 0 and 1. For example, the degree of membership of a person in the set of "tall people" is more flexible than a simple yes or no answer and can be a real number such as 0.75.
An inner model of Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory (ZF) is a transitive class that includes all the ordinals and satisfies all the axioms of ZF. The canonical example is the constructible universe L developed by Gödel.
One reason that the study of inner models is of interest is that it can be used to prove consistency results. For example, it can be shown that regardless of whether a model V of ZF satisfies the continuum hypothesis or the axiom of choice, the inner model L constructed inside the original model will satisfy both the generalized continuum hypothesis and the axiom of choice. Thus the assumption that ZF is consistent (has at least one model) implies that ZF together with these two principles is consistent.
The study of inner models is common in the study of determinacy and large cardinals, especially when considering axioms such as the axiom of determinacy that contradict the axiom of choice. Even if a fixed model of set theory satisfies the axiom of choice, it is possible for an inner model to fail to satisfy the axiom of choice. For example, the existence of sufficiently large cardinals implies that there is an inner model satisfying the axiom of determinacy (and thus not satisfying the axiom of choice).
A large cardinal is a cardinal number with an extra property. Many such properties are studied, including inaccessible cardinals, measurable cardinals, and many more. These properties typically imply the cardinal number must be very large, with the existence of a cardinal with the specified property unprovable in Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory.
Determinacy refers to the fact that, under appropriate assumptions, certain two-player games of perfect information are determined from the start in the sense that one player must have a winning strategy. The existence of these strategies has important consequences in descriptive set theory, as the assumption that a broader class of games is determined often implies that a broader class of sets will have a topological property. The axiom of determinacy (AD) is an important object of study; although incompatible with the axiom of choice, AD implies that all subsets of the real line are well behaved (in particular, measurable and with the perfect set property). AD can be used to prove that the Wadge degrees have an elegant structure.
Paul Cohen invented the method of forcing while searching for a model of ZFC in which the continuum hypothesis fails, or a model of ZF in which the axiom of choice fails. Forcing adjoins to some given model of set theory additional sets in order to create a larger model with properties determined (i.e. "forced") by the construction and the original model. For example, Cohen's construction adjoins additional subsets of the natural numbers without changing any of the cardinal numbers of the original model. Forcing is also one of two methods for proving relative consistency by finitistic methods, the other method being Boolean-valued models.
A cardinal invariant is a property of the real line measured by a cardinal number. For example, a well-studied invariant is the smallest cardinality of a collection of meagre sets of reals whose union is the entire real line. These are invariants in the sense that any two isomorphic models of set theory must give the same cardinal for each invariant. Many cardinal invariants have been studied, and the relationships between them are often complex and related to axioms of set theory.
Set-theoretic topology studies questions of general topology that are set-theoretic in nature or that require advanced methods of set theory for their solution. Many of these theorems are independent of ZFC, requiring stronger axioms for their proof. A famous problem is the normal Moore space question, a question in general topology that was the subject of intense research. The answer to the normal Moore space question was eventually proved to be independent of ZFC.
From set theory's inception, some mathematicians have objected to it as a foundation for mathematics. The most common objection to set theory, one Kronecker voiced in set theory's earliest years, starts from the constructivist view that mathematics is loosely related to computation. If this view is granted, then the treatment of infinite sets, both in naive and in axiomatic set theory, introduces into mathematics methods and objects that are not computable even in principle. The feasibility of constructivism as a substitute foundation for mathematics was greatly increased by Errett Bishop's influential book Foundations of Constructive Analysis.
A different objection put forth by Henri Poincaré is that defining sets using the axiom schemas of specification and replacement, as well as the axiom of power set, introduces impredicativity, a type of circularity, into the definitions of mathematical objects. The scope of predicatively founded mathematics, while less than that of the commonly accepted Zermelo–Fraenkel theory, is much greater than that of constructive mathematics, to the point that Solomon Feferman has said that "all of scientifically applicable analysis can be developed [using predicative methods]".
Ludwig Wittgenstein condemned set theory philosophically for its connotations of mathematical platonism. He wrote that "set theory is wrong", since it builds on the "nonsense" of fictitious symbolism, has "pernicious idioms", and that it is nonsensical to talk about "all numbers". Wittgenstein identified mathematics with algorithmic human deduction; the need for a secure foundation for mathematics seemed, to him, nonsensical. Moreover, since human effort is necessarily finite, Wittgenstein's philosophy required an ontological commitment to radical constructivism and finitism. Meta-mathematical statements – which, for Wittgenstein, included any statement quantifying over infinite domains, and thus almost all modern set theory – are not mathematics. Few modern philosophers have adopted Wittgenstein's views after a spectacular blunder in Remarks on the Foundations of Mathematics: Wittgenstein attempted to refute Gödel's incompleteness theorems after having only read the abstract. As reviewers Kreisel, Bernays, Dummett, and Goodstein all pointed out, many of his critiques did not apply to the paper in full. Only recently have philosophers such as Crispin Wright begun to rehabilitate Wittgenstein's arguments.
Category theorists have proposed topos theory as an alternative to traditional axiomatic set theory. Topos theory can interpret various alternatives to that theory, such as constructivism, finite set theory, and computable set theory. Topoi also give a natural setting for forcing and discussions of the independence of choice from ZF, as well as providing the framework for pointless topology and Stone spaces.
An active area of research is the univalent foundations and related to it homotopy type theory. Within homotopy type theory, a set may be regarded as a homotopy 0-type, with universal properties of sets arising from the inductive and recursive properties of higher inductive types. Principles such as the axiom of choice and the law of the excluded middle can be formulated in a manner corresponding to the classical formulation in set theory or perhaps in a spectrum of distinct ways unique to type theory. Some of these principles may be proven to be a consequence of other principles. The variety of formulations of these axiomatic principles allows for a detailed analysis of the formulations required in order to derive various mathematical results.
As set theory gained popularity as a foundation for modern mathematics, there has been support for the idea of introducing the basics of naive set theory early in mathematics education.
In the US in the 1960s, the New Math experiment aimed to teach basic set theory, among other abstract concepts, to primary school students but was met with much criticism. The math syllabus in European schools followed this trend and currently includes the subject at different levels in all grades. Venn diagrams are widely employed to explain basic set-theoretic relationships to primary school students (even though John Venn originally devised them as part of a procedure to assess the validity of inferences in term logic).
Set theory is used to introduce students to logical operators (NOT, AND, OR), and semantic or rule description (technically intensional definition) of sets (e.g. "months starting with the letter A"), which may be useful when learning computer programming, since Boolean logic is used in various programming languages. Likewise, sets and other collection-like objects, such as multisets and lists, are common datatypes in computer science and programming.
In addition to that, certain sets are commonly used in mathematical teaching (such as the sets
N of natural numbers, Z of integers, R of real numbers, etc.). These are commonly used when defining a mathematical function as a relation from one set (the domain) to another set (the range).
--- Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory ---
In set theory, Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory, named after mathematicians Ernst Zermelo and Abraham Fraenkel, is an axiomatic system that was proposed in the early twentieth century in order to formulate a theory of sets free of paradoxes such as Russell's paradox.  Today, Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory, with the historically controversial axiom of choice (AC) included, is the standard form of axiomatic set theory and as such is the most common foundation of mathematics. Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory with the axiom of choice included is abbreviated ZFC, where C stands for "choice", and ZF refers to the axioms of Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory with the axiom of choice excluded.
Informally, Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory is intended to formalize a single primitive notion, that of a hereditary well-founded set, so that all entities in the universe of discourse are such sets. Thus the axioms of Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory refer only to pure sets and prevent its models from containing urelements (elements that are not themselves sets). Furthermore, proper classes (collections of mathematical objects defined by a property shared by their members where the collections are too big to be sets) can only be treated indirectly. Specifically, Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory does not allow for the existence of a universal set (a set containing all sets) nor for unrestricted comprehension, thereby avoiding Russell's paradox. Von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel set theory (NBG) is a commonly used conservative extension of Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory that does allow explicit treatment of proper classes.
There are many equivalent formulations of the axioms of Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory.  Most of the axioms state the existence of particular sets defined from other sets. For example, the axiom of pairing implies  that given any two sets
a and b there is a new set { a , b } containing exactly a and b . Other axioms describe properties of set membership. A goal of the axioms is that each axiom should be true if interpreted as a statement about the collection of all sets in the von Neumann universe (also known as the cumulative hierarchy).
The metamathematics of Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory has been extensively studied. Landmark results in this area established the logical independence of the axiom of choice from the remaining Zermelo-Fraenkel axioms and of the continuum hypothesis from ZFC. The consistency of a theory such as ZFC cannot be proved within the theory itself, as shown by Gödel's second incompleteness theorem.
The modern study of set theory was initiated by Georg Cantor and Richard Dedekind in the 1870s. However, the discovery of paradoxes in naive set theory, such as Russell's paradox, led to the desire for a more rigorous form of set theory that was free of these paradoxes.
In 1908, Ernst Zermelo proposed the first axiomatic set theory, Zermelo set theory. However, as first pointed out by Abraham Fraenkel in a 1921 letter to Zermelo, this theory was incapable of proving the existence of certain sets and cardinal numbers whose existence was taken for granted by most set theorists of the time, notably the cardinal number aleph-omega (
ℵ ω ) and the set { Z 0 , P ( Z 0 ) , P ( P ( Z 0 ) ) , P ( P ( P ( Z 0 ) ) ) , . . . } , where Z 0 is any infinite set and
P is the power set operation. Moreover, one of Zermelo's axioms invoked a concept, that of a "definite" property, whose operational meaning was not clear. In 1922, Fraenkel and Thoralf Skolem independently proposed operationalizing a "definite" property as one that could be formulated as a well-formed formula in a first-order logic whose atomic formulas were limited to set membership and identity. They also independently proposed replacing the axiom schema of specification with the axiom schema of replacement. Appending this schema, as well as the axiom of regularity (first proposed by John von Neumann), to Zermelo set theory yields the theory ZFC.
Formally, ZFC is a one-sorted theory in first-order logic. The equality symbol can be treated as either a primitive logical symbol or a high-level abbreviation for having exactly the same elements. The former approach is the most common. The signature has a single predicate symbol, usually denoted
∈ , which is a predicate symbol of arity 2 (a binary relation symbol). This symbol symbolizes a set membership relation. For example, the formula
a ∈ b means that a is an element of the set
b (also read as a is a member of b ). There are different ways to formulate the formal language. Some authors may choose a different set of connectives or quantifiers. For example, the logical connective NAND alone can encode the other connectives, a property known as functional completeness. This section attempts to strike a balance between simplicity and intuitiveness.
The language's alphabet consists of:
A countably infinite number of variables used for representing sets
The logical connectives
¬ , ∧ , ∨ The quantifier symbols
∀ , ∃ The equality symbol = The set membership symbol
∈ Brackets ( ) With this alphabet, the recursive rules for forming well-formed formulae (wff) are as follows:
Let x and y be metavariables for any variables. These are the two ways to build atomic formulae (the simplest wffs):
x = y x ∈ y Let ϕ and ψ be metavariables for any wff, and
x be a metavariable for any variable. These are valid wff constructions:
¬ ϕ ( ϕ ∧ ψ ) ( ϕ ∨ ψ ) ∀ x ϕ ∃ x ϕ A well-formed formula can be thought as a syntax tree. The leaf nodes are always atomic formulae. Nodes
∧ and ∨ have exactly two child nodes, while nodes
¬ , ∀ x and ∃ x have exactly one. There are countably infinitely many wffs, however, each wff has a finite number of nodes.
There are many equivalent formulations of the ZFC axioms. The following particular axiom set is from Kunen (1980). The axioms in order below are expressed in a mixture of first-order logic and high-level abbreviations.
Axioms 1–8 form ZF, while the axiom 9 turns ZF into ZFC. Following Kunen (1980), we use the equivalent well-ordering theorem in place of the axiom of choice for axiom 9.
All formulations of ZFC imply that at least one set exists. Kunen includes an axiom that directly asserts the existence of a set, although he notes that he does so only "for emphasis". Its omission here can be justified in two ways. First, in the standard semantics of first-order logic in which ZFC is typically formalized, the domain of discourse must be nonempty. Hence, it is a logical theorem of first-order logic that something exists – usually expressed as the assertion that something is identical to itself,
∃ x ( x = x ) . Consequently, it is a theorem of every first-order theory that something exists. However, as noted above, because in the intended semantics of ZFC, there are only sets, the interpretation of this logical theorem in the context of ZFC is that some set exists. Hence, there is no need for a separate axiom asserting that a set exists. Second, however, even if ZFC is formulated in so-called free logic, in which it is not provable from logic alone that something exists, the axiom of infinity asserts that an infinite set exists. This implies that a set exists, and so, once again, it is superfluous to include an axiom asserting as much.
Two sets are equal (are the same set) if they have the same elements.
The converse of this axiom follows from the substitution property of equality. ZFC is constructed in first-order logic. Some formulations of first-order logic include identity; others do not. If the variety of first-order logic in which one is constructing set theory does not include equality "
= ", x = y may be defined as an abbreviation for the following formula:
∀ z [ z ∈ x ⇔ z ∈ y ] ∧ ∀ w [ x ∈ w ⇔ y ∈ w ] . In this case, the axiom of extensionality can be reformulated as
which says that if x and y have the same elements, then they belong to the same sets.
Every non-empty set x contains a member y such that x and y are disjoint sets. or in modern notation:
∀ x ( x ≠ ∅ ⇒ ∃ y ( y ∈ x ∧ y ∩ x = ∅ ) ) . With the axioms of pairing and union, this implies that no set is an element of itself. With the axioms of infinity, replacement, and union, this implies that every set has an ordinal rank.
Subsets are commonly constructed using set builder notation. For example, the even integers can be constructed as the subset of the integers
Z satisfying the congruence modulo predicate
x ≡ 0 ( mod 2 ) : In general, the subset of a set
z obeying a formula φ ( x ) with one free variable
x may be written as: The axiom schema of specification states that this subset always exists (it is an axiom schema because there is one axiom for each
φ ). Formally, let φ be any formula in the language of ZFC with all free variables among
x , z , w 1 , … , w n ( y is not free in φ ). Then: Note that the axiom schema of specification can only construct subsets and does not allow the construction of entities of the more general form:
This restriction is necessary to avoid Russell's paradox (let
y = { x : x ∉ x } then y ∈ y ⇔ y ∉ y ) and its variants that accompany naive set theory with unrestricted comprehension (since under this restriction
y only refers to sets within
z that don't belong to themselves, and
y ∈ z has not been established, even though
y ⊆ z is the case, so y stands in a separate position from which it can't refer to or comprehend itself; therefore, in a certain sense, this axiom schema is saying that in order to build a
y on the basis of a formula
φ ( x ) , we need to previously restrict the sets
y will regard within a set
z that leaves y outside so y can't refer to itself; or, in other words, sets shouldn't refer to themselves).
In some other axiomatizations of ZF, this axiom is redundant in that it follows from the axiom schema of replacement and the axiom of the empty set.
On the other hand, the axiom schema of specification can be used to prove the existence of the empty set, denoted
∅ , once at least one set is known to exist. One way to do this is to use a property
φ which no set has. For example, if
w is any existing set, the empty set can be constructed as
Thus, the axiom of the empty set is implied by the nine axioms presented here.  The axiom of extensionality implies the empty set is unique (does not depend on
w ). It is common to make a definitional extension that adds the symbol "
∅ " to the language of ZFC.
If x and y are sets, then there exists a set which contains
x and y as elements; for example, if
x = { 1 , 2 } and y = { 2 , 3 } , then z might be { { 1 , 2 } , { 2 , 3 } } . The axiom schema of specification must be used to reduce this to a set with exactly these two elements.
The union over the elements of a set exists. For example, the union over the elements of the set
{ { 1 , 2 } , { 2 , 3 } } is { 1 , 2 , 3 } . The axiom of union states that for any set of sets
F , there is a set A containing every element that is a member of some member of
F : Although this formula doesn't directly assert the existence of
∪ F , the set ∪ F can be constructed from
A in the above using the axiom schema of specification:
The axiom schema of replacement asserts that the image of a set under any definable function will also fall inside a set.
Formally, let φ be any formula in the language of ZFC whose free variables are among
x , y , A , w 1 , … , w n , so that in particular
B is not free in φ . Then: (The unique existential quantifier
∃ ! denotes the existence of exactly one element such that it follows a given statement.)
In other words, if the relation
φ represents a definable function
f , A represents its domain, and
f ( x ) is a set for every x ∈ A , then the range of f is a subset of some set
B . The form stated here, in which
B may be larger than strictly necessary, is sometimes called the axiom schema of collection.
Let S ( w ) abbreviate w ∪ { w } , where w is some set. (We can see that
{ w } is a valid set by applying the axiom of pairing with
x = y = w so that the set z is { w } ). Then there exists a set X such that the empty set
∅ , defined axiomatically, is a member of X and, whenever a set y is a member of X then
S ( y ) is also a member of X.
or in modern notation:
∃ X [ ∅ ∈ X ∧ ∀ y ( y ∈ X ⇒ S ( y ) ∈ X ) ] . More colloquially, there exists a set X having infinitely many members. These members are built by repeatedly applying the operation
S starting from the empty set. Each result of this construction is distinct from the previous ones, so the process does not loop or repeat. The minimal set X satisfying the axiom of infinity is the von Neumann ordinal ω, which can also be thought of as the set of natural numbers
N . (Note that the well-foundedness of
N does not require the axiom of regularity; it follows naturally from the structure of the construction.)
By definition, a set z is a subset of a set x if and only if every element of
z is also an element of
x : The Axiom of power set states that for any set
x , there is a set y that contains every subset of
x : The axiom schema of specification is then used to define the power set
P ( x ) as the subset of such a
y containing the subsets of
x exactly: Axioms 1–8 define ZF. Alternative forms of these axioms are often encountered, some of which are listed in Jech . Some ZF axiomatizations include an axiom asserting that the empty set exists. The axioms of pairing, union, replacement, and power set are often stated so that the members of the set
x whose existence is being asserted are just those sets which the axiom asserts
x must contain. The following axiom is added to turn ZF into ZFC:
The last axiom, commonly known as the axiom of choice, is presented here as a property about well-orders. :)
For any set X , there exists a binary relation
R which well-orders X .  This means R is a linear order on X such that every nonempty subset of X has a least element under the order R . Given axioms 1 – 8, many statements are provably equivalent to axiom 9. The most common of these goes as follows. Let
X be a set whose members are all nonempty. Then there exists a function
f from X to the union of the members of
X , called a "choice function", such that for all
Y ∈ X one has f ( Y ) ∈ Y . A third version of the axiom, also equivalent, is Zorn's lemma.
Since the existence of a choice function when
X is a finite set is easily proved from axioms 1–8, AC only matters for certain infinite sets. AC is characterized as nonconstructive because it asserts the existence of a choice function but says nothing about how this choice function is to be "constructed".
One motivation for the ZFC axioms is the cumulative hierarchy of sets introduced by John von Neumann. In this viewpoint, the universe of set theory is built up in stages, with one stage for each ordinal number. At stage 0, there are no sets yet. At each following stage, a set is added to the universe if all of its elements have been added at previous stages. Thus the empty set is added at stage 1, and the set containing the empty set is added at stage 2. The collection of all sets that are obtained in this way, over all the stages, is known as V. The sets in V can be arranged into a hierarchy by assigning to each set the first stage at which that set was added to V.
It is provable that a set is in V if and only if the set is pure and well-founded. And V satisfies all the axioms of ZFC if the class of ordinals has appropriate reflection properties. For example, suppose that a set x is added at stage α, which means that every element of x was added at a stage earlier than α. Then, every subset of x is also added at (or before) stage α, because all elements of any subset of x were also added before stage α. This means that any subset of x which the axiom of separation can construct is added at (or before) stage α, and that the powerset of x will be added at the next stage after α.
The picture of the universe of sets stratified into the cumulative hierarchy is characteristic of ZFC and related axiomatic set theories such as Von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel set theory (often called NBG) and Morse–Kelley set theory. The cumulative hierarchy is not compatible with other set theories such as New Foundations.
It is possible to change the definition of V so that at each stage, instead of adding all the subsets of the union of the previous stages, subsets are only added if they are definable in a certain sense. This results in a more "narrow" hierarchy, which gives the constructible universe L, which also satisfies all the axioms of ZFC, including the axiom of choice. It is independent from the ZFC axioms whether V = L. Although the structure of L is more regular and well behaved than that of V, few mathematicians argue that V = L should be added to ZFC as an additional "axiom of constructibility".
Proper classes (collections of mathematical objects defined by a property shared by their members which are too big to be sets) can only be treated indirectly in ZF (and thus ZFC).
An alternative to proper classes while staying within ZF and ZFC is the virtual class notational construct introduced by Quine (1969), where the entire construct y ∈ { x | Fx } is simply defined as Fy. This provides a simple notation for classes that can contain sets but need not themselves be sets, while not committing to the ontology of classes (because the notation can be syntactically converted to one that only uses sets).  The axiom schemata of replacement and separation each contain infinitely many instances. Montague (1961) included a result first proved in his 1957 Ph.D. thesis: if ZFC is consistent, it is impossible to axiomatize ZFC using only finitely many axioms. On the other hand, von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel set theory (NBG) can be finitely axiomatized. The ontology of NBG includes proper classes as well as sets; a set is any class that can be a member of another class. NBG and ZFC are equivalent set theories in the sense that any theorem not mentioning classes and provable in one theory can be proved in the other.
Gödel's second incompleteness theorem says that a recursively axiomatizable system that can interpret Robinson arithmetic can prove its own consistency only if it is inconsistent. Moreover, Robinson arithmetic can be interpreted in general set theory, a small fragment of ZFC. Hence the consistency of ZFC cannot be proved within ZFC itself (unless it is actually inconsistent). Thus, to the extent that ZFC is identified with ordinary mathematics, the consistency of ZFC cannot be demonstrated in ordinary mathematics. The consistency of ZFC does follow from the existence of a weakly inaccessible cardinal, which is unprovable in ZFC if ZFC is consistent. Nevertheless, it is deemed unlikely that ZFC harbors an unsuspected contradiction; it is widely believed that if ZFC were inconsistent, that fact would have been uncovered by now. This much is certain – ZFC is immune to the classic paradoxes of naive set theory: Russell's paradox, the Burali-Forti paradox, and Cantor's paradox.
Abian & LaMacchia (1978) studied a subtheory of ZFC consisting of the axioms of extensionality, union, powerset, replacement, and choice. Using models, they proved this subtheory consistent, and proved that each of the axioms of extensionality, replacement, and power set is independent of the four remaining axioms of this subtheory. If this subtheory is augmented with the axiom of infinity, each of the axioms of union, choice, and infinity is independent of the five remaining axioms. Because there are non-well-founded models that satisfy each axiom of ZFC except the axiom of regularity, that axiom is independent of the other ZFC axioms.
If consistent, ZFC cannot prove the existence of the inaccessible cardinals that category theory requires. Huge sets of this nature are possible if ZF is augmented with Tarski's axiom. Assuming that axiom turns the axioms of infinity, power set, and choice (7 – 9 above) into theorems.
Many important statements are independent of ZFC. The independence is usually proved by forcing, whereby it is shown that every countable transitive model of ZFC (sometimes augmented with large cardinal axioms) can be expanded to satisfy the statement in question. A different expansion is then shown to satisfy the negation of the statement. An independence proof by forcing automatically proves independence from arithmetical statements, other concrete statements, and large cardinal axioms. Some statements independent of ZFC can be proven to hold in particular inner models, such as in the constructible universe. However, some statements that are true about constructible sets are not consistent with hypothesized large cardinal axioms.
Forcing proves that the following statements are independent of ZFC:
Axiom of constructibility (V=L) (which is also not a ZFC axiom)
Continuum hypothesis Diamond principle Martin's axiom (which is not a ZFC axiom)
Suslin hypothesis Remarks: The consistency of V=L is provable by inner models but not forcing: every model of ZF can be trimmed to become a model of ZFC + V=L.
The diamond principle implies the continuum hypothesis and the negation of the Suslin hypothesis.
Martin's axiom plus the negation of the continuum hypothesis implies the Suslin hypothesis.
The constructible universe satisfies the generalized continuum hypothesis, the diamond principle, Martin's axiom and the Kurepa hypothesis.
The failure of the Kurepa hypothesis is equiconsistent with the existence of a strongly inaccessible cardinal.
A variation on the method of forcing can also be used to demonstrate the consistency and unprovability of the axiom of choice, i.e., that the axiom of choice is independent of ZF. The consistency of choice can be (relatively) easily verified by proving that the inner model L satisfies choice. (Thus every model of ZF contains a submodel of ZFC, so that Con(ZF) implies Con(ZFC).) Since forcing preserves choice, we cannot directly produce a model contradicting choice from a model satisfying choice. However, we can use forcing to create a model which contains a suitable submodel, namely one satisfying ZF but not C.
Another method of proving independence results, one owing nothing to forcing, is based on Gödel's second incompleteness theorem. This approach employs the statement whose independence is being examined, to prove the existence of a set model of ZFC, in which case Con(ZFC) is true. Since ZFC satisfies the conditions of Gödel's second theorem, the consistency of ZFC is unprovable in ZFC (provided that ZFC is, in fact, consistent). Hence no statement allowing such a proof can be proved in ZFC. This method can prove that the existence of large cardinals is not provable in ZFC, but cannot prove that assuming such cardinals, given ZFC, is free of contradiction.
The project to unify set theorists behind additional axioms to resolve the continuum hypothesis or other meta-mathematical ambiguities is sometimes known as "Gödel's program". Mathematicians currently debate which axioms are the most plausible or "self-evident", which axioms are the most useful in various domains, and about to what degree usefulness should be traded off with plausibility; some "multiverse" set theorists argue that usefulness should be the sole ultimate criterion in which axioms to customarily adopt. One school of thought leans on expanding the "iterative" concept of a set to produce a set-theoretic universe with an interesting and complex but reasonably tractable structure by adopting forcing axioms; another school advocates for a tidier, less cluttered universe, perhaps focused on a "core" inner model.
ZFC has been criticized both for being excessively strong and for being excessively weak, as well as for its failure to capture objects such as proper classes.
Many mathematical theorems can be proven in much weaker systems than ZFC, such as Peano arithmetic and second-order arithmetic (as explored by the program of reverse mathematics). Saunders Mac Lane and Solomon Feferman have both made this point. Some of "mainstream mathematics" (mathematics not directly connected with axiomatic set theory) is beyond Peano arithmetic and second-order arithmetic, but still, all such mathematics can be carried out in ZC (Zermelo set theory with choice), another theory weaker than ZFC. Much of the power of ZFC, including the axiom of regularity and the axiom schema of replacement, is included primarily to facilitate the study of the set theory itself.
On the other hand, among axiomatic set theories, ZFC is comparatively weak. Unlike New Foundations, ZFC does not admit the existence of a universal set. Hence the universe of sets under ZFC is not closed under the elementary operations of the algebra of sets. Unlike von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel set theory (NBG) and Morse–Kelley set theory (MK), ZFC does not admit the existence of proper classes. A further comparative weakness of ZFC is that the axiom of choice included in ZFC is weaker than the axiom of global choice included in NBG and MK.
There are numerous mathematical statements independent of ZFC. These include the continuum hypothesis, the Whitehead problem, and the normal Moore space conjecture. Some of these conjectures are provable with the addition of axioms such as Martin's axiom or large cardinal axioms to ZFC.  Some others are decided in ZF+AD where AD is the axiom of determinacy, a strong supposition incompatible with choice. One attraction of large cardinal axioms is that they enable many results from ZF+AD to be established in ZFC adjoined by some large cardinal axiom. The Mizar system and metamath have adopted Tarski–Grothendieck set theory, an extension of ZFC, so that proofs involving Grothendieck universes (encountered in category theory and algebraic geometry) can be formalized.
Foundations of mathematics


In mathematics, a set is a collection of different things; the things are called elements or members of the set and are typically mathematical objects: numbers, symbols, points in space, lines, other geometric shapes, variables, functions, or even other sets.
Mathematics typically does not define precisely what constitutes a "set" or "collection", because such a definition would have to be in terms of something else previously defined.  Instead, sets serve as foundational objects whose behavior is described by axioms modeled on intuition about collections, and then essentially all other mathematical objects are rigorously defined in terms of sets.
Set theory studies possible axiom systems and their consequences.
Since the first half of the 20th century, ZFC (Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory with the axiom of choice) has been the axiom system most commonly used.
Before the end of the 19th century, sets were not studied specifically, and they were not clearly distinguished from sequences. Most mathematicians considered infinity as potential—meaning that it is the result of an endless process—and were reluctant to consider infinite sets. For example, a line was considered not as a set of points, but as a locus where a point may be located.
The mathematical study of infinite sets began with Georg Cantor (1845–1918). This provided some counterintuitive statements and paradoxes. For example, the number line has an infinite number of elements that is strictly larger than the infinite number of natural numbers, and any line segment has the same number of elements as the whole line.  Assuming the existence of a set of all sets led to a contradiction, Russell's paradox.  This led to the foundational crisis of mathematics, and to proposed resolutions.  One of these, Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory, has been generally adopted as a foundation of set theory and all mathematics, though much of mathematics does not require its full power.
Meanwhile, sets started to be widely used in all mathematics. In particular, algebraic structures and mathematical spaces are typically defined in terms of sets. Also, many older mathematical results are restated in terms of sets. For example, Euclid's theorem is often stated as "the set of the prime numbers is infinite". This wide use of sets in mathematics was prophesied by David Hilbert when saying: "No one will drive us from the paradise that Cantor created for us."
The object of this article is to summarize the manipulation rules and properties of sets that are commonly used in mathematics, without reference to a specific logical framework. For the branch of mathematics that studies sets, see Set theory; for an informal presentation of the corresponding logical framework, see Naive set theory; for a more formal presentation, see Axiomatic set theory and Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory.
In mathematics, a set is a collection of different things, called elements or members of the set.  A set may also be called a collection or family, especially when its elements are themselves sets; this may avoid confusion between the set and its members.  A set may be specified either by listing its elements or by giving a property that characterizes its elements, such as for the set of the prime numbers or the set of all students in a given class.
If ⁠ x ⁠ is an element of a set ⁠
S ⁠, one says that ⁠ x ⁠ belongs to ⁠ S ⁠ or is in ⁠ S ⁠, and one writes ⁠ x ∈ S ⁠. The statement "⁠ y ⁠ is not in ⁠ S ⁠" is written as ⁠ y ∉ S ⁠. For example, if ⁠ Z ⁠ is the set of all integers, then ⁠
− 3 ∈ Z ⁠ and ⁠ 1.5 ∉ Z ⁠.  The axiom of extensionality states that two sets are equal if and only if they have the same elements.
There exists a set with no elements, and extensionality implies that there is only one such set.  It is called the empty set (or null set) and is denoted ⁠
∅ ⁠, ⁠ ∅ ⁠, or ⁠ { } ⁠. A singleton is a set with exactly one element. If ⁠
x ⁠ is this element, the singleton is denoted ⁠
{ x } ⁠. The sets ⁠ { ∅ } ⁠ and ⁠ ∅ ⁠  are different, because the former has one element (namely, ⁠
∅ ⁠) and the latter has no elements at all.
A set is finite if there exists a natural number ⁠
n ⁠ such that the first ⁠
n ⁠ natural numbers can be put in bijection (one-to-one correspondence) with the elements of the set. In this case, one says that ⁠
n ⁠ is the number of elements of the set. A set is infinite if such an ⁠
n ⁠ does not exist. The empty set is a finite set with ⁠
0 ⁠ elements. The natural numbers form an infinite set, commonly denoted ⁠
N ⁠. Other examples of infinite sets include the integers (⁠
Z ⁠), the rational numbers (⁠
Q ⁠), the real numbers (⁠
R ⁠), nonzero real vector spaces, curves, and most other mathematical spaces.
Extensionality implies that to specify a set, it suffices either to list its elements or to provide a property that characterize the set's elements among the elements of a possibly larger set.
Roster or enumeration notation is a notation introduced by Ernst Zermelo in 1908 that specifies a set by listing its elements between braces, separated by commas. For example, one sees that ⁠
{ 4 , 2 , 1 , 3 } ⁠ and ⁠ { blue, white, red } ⁠ denote sets and not tuples because of the enclosing braces.
The notations ⁠ { } ⁠ for the empty set and ⁠
{ x } ⁠ for a singleton are examples of roster notation.
When specifying a set, all that matters is whether each potential element is in the set or not, so a set does not change if elements are repeated or arranged in a different order. For example,
{ 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 } = { 4 , 2 , 1 , 3 } = { 4 , 2 , 4 , 3 , 1 , 3 } . When there is a clear pattern for generating all set elements, one can use an ellipsis to abbreviate the notation; for example,
{ 1 , 2 , 3 , … , 10 } is a shorthand for ⁠ { 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 } ⁠. Ellipses in roster notation can also be used to describe some infinite sets; for example, the set of all integers can be denoted as
{ … , − 3 , − 2 , − 1 , 0 , 1 , 2 , 3 , … } or { 0 , 1 , − 1 , 2 , − 2 , 3 , − 3 , … } . Set-builder notation specifies a set as being the set of all elements that satisfy some logical formula. More precisely, if ⁠
P ( x ) ⁠ is a logical formula depending on a variable ⁠
x ⁠, which evaluates to true or false depending on the value of ⁠
x ⁠, then { x ∣ P ( x ) } or { x : P ( x ) } denotes the set of all ⁠
x ⁠ for which ⁠ P ( x ) ⁠ is true. For example, a set ⁠
F ⁠ can be specified as follows:
F = { n ∣ n is an integer, and 0 ≤ n ≤ 19 } . In this notation, the vertical bar "|" is read as "such that", and the whole formula can be read as "⁠
F ⁠ is the set of all  ⁠
n ⁠ such that ⁠ n ⁠ is an integer in the range from 0 to 19 inclusive".
Some logical formulas, such as ⁠
S is a set ⁠ or ⁠ S is a set and S ∉ S ⁠ cannot be used in set-builder notation because there is no set for which the elements are characterized by the formula. There are several ways for avoiding the problem. One may prove that the formula defines a set; this is often almost immediate, but may be very difficult.
One may also introduce a larger set ⁠
U ⁠ that must contain all elements of the specified set, and write the notation as
{ x ∣ x ∈ U and ... } or { x ∈ U ∣ ... } . One may also define ⁠
U ⁠ once for all and take the convention that every variable that appears on the left of the vertical bar of the notation represents an element of ⁠
U ⁠. This amounts to saying that ⁠
x ∈ U ⁠ is implicit in set-builder notation. In this case, ⁠
U ⁠ is often called the domain of discourse or a universe.
For example, with the convention that a lower case Latin letter may represent a real number and nothing else, the expression
{ x ∣ x ∉ Q } is an abbreviation of
{ x ∈ R ∣ x ∉ Q } , which defines the irrational numbers.
A subset of a set ⁠ B ⁠ is a set ⁠ A ⁠ such that every element of ⁠
A ⁠ is also an element of ⁠
B ⁠. The following are different ways of expressing the same thing:
⁠ A ⁠ is a subset of ⁠ B ⁠, ⁠ ∀ x ( x ∈ A ⟹ x ∈ B ) ⁠, ⁠ A ⁠ is contained in ⁠ B ⁠, ⁠ A ⊆ B ⁠, ⁠ B ⁠ is a superset of ⁠ A ⁠, ⁠ B ⁠ contains ⁠ A ⁠, ⁠ B ⊇ A ⁠. The relationship between sets established by ⊆ is called inclusion or containment.
A set ⁠ A ⁠ is a proper subset of a set ⁠
B ⁠ if ⁠ A ⊆ B ⁠ and ⁠ A ≠ B ⁠; to denote this, one writes ⁠
A ⊊ B ⁠, or ⁠ A ⫋ B ⁠. Likewise, one may write ⁠
B ⊋ A ⁠ or ⁠ B ⫌ A ⁠. The notation ⁠ A ⊂ B ⁠ often means ⁠ A ⊆ B ⁠, but some authors use ⁠
A ⊂ B ⁠ to mean ⁠ A ⊊ B ⁠. To avoid ambiguity, one can write ⁠
A ⊆ B ⁠ or ⁠ A ⊊ B ⁠, depending on what is intended.
The set of all humans is a proper subset of the set of all mammals.
⁠ { 1 , 3 } ⊂ { 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 } ⁠ ⁠ { 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 } ⊆ { 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 } ⁠ Two sets are equal if and only if they contain each other: ⁠
A = B ⁠ is equivalent to (⁠
A ⊆ B ⁠ and ⁠ B ⊆ A ⁠). The empty set is a subset of every set: ⁠
∅ ⊆ A ⁠. There are several standard operations that produce new sets from  given sets, analogously to how  addition and multiplication produce new numbers from given numbers. The operations that are considered in this section are those such that all elements of the produced sets belong to a previously defined set. These operations are commonly illustrated with Euler diagrams and Venn diagrams.
The intersection of two sets ⁠
A ⁠ and ⁠ B ⁠ is a set denoted ⁠ A ∩ B ⁠ whose elements are those elements that belong to both ⁠
A ⁠ and ⁠ B ⁠. That is, A ∩ B = { x ∣ x ∈ A ∧ x ∈ B } , where ⁠ ∧ ⁠ denotes the logical and.
Intersection is associative and commutative; this means that for proceeding a sequence of intersections, one may proceed in any order, without the need of parentheses for specifying the order of operations.
If ⁠ S ⁠ is a nonempty set of sets, its intersection, denoted
⋂ A ∈ S A , {\textstyle \bigcap _{A\in {\mathcal {S}}}A,}
is the set whose elements are those elements that belong to all sets in ⁠
S ⁠. That is, ⋂ A ∈ S A = { x ∣ ( ∀ A ∈ S ) x ∈ A } . Example: If S = { X , Y } , then ⋂ A ∈ S A = X ∩ Y {\textstyle \bigcap _{A\in {\mathcal {S}}}A=X\cap Y}
. The union of two sets ⁠
A ⁠ and ⁠ B ⁠ is a set denoted ⁠ A ∪ B ⁠ whose elements are those elements that belong to ⁠
A ⁠ or ⁠ B ⁠ or both. That is, A ∪ B = { x ∣ x ∈ A ∨ x ∈ B } , where ⁠ ∨ ⁠ denotes the logical or.
Union is associative and commutative.
If ⁠ S ⁠ is a  set of sets, its union, denoted
⋃ S = ⋃ A ∈ S A , {\textstyle \bigcup S=\bigcup _{A\in {\mathcal {S}}}A,}
is the set whose elements are those elements that belong to at least one set in ⁠
S ⁠. That is, ⋃ A ∈ S A = { x ∣ ( ∃ A ∈ S ) x ∈ A } . Example: If S = { X , Y } , then ⋃ A ∈ S A = X ∪ Y {\textstyle \bigcup _{A\in {\mathcal {S}}}A=X\cup Y}
. The set difference of two sets ⁠
A ⁠ and ⁠ B ⁠, is a set, denoted ⁠
A ∖ B ⁠ or ⁠ A − B ⁠, whose elements are those elements that belong to ⁠
A ⁠, but not to ⁠ B ⁠. That is, A ∖ B = { x ∣ x ∈ A ∧ x ∉ B } , where ⁠ ∧ ⁠ denotes the logical and.
When ⁠ B ⊆ A ⁠ the difference ⁠ A ∖ B ⁠ is also called the complement of ⁠
B ⁠ in ⁠ A ⁠. When all sets that are considered are subsets of a fixed universal set ⁠
U ⁠, the complement ⁠ U ∖ A ⁠ is often called the absolute complement of ⁠
A ⁠. The symmetric difference of two sets ⁠
A ⁠ and ⁠ B ⁠, denoted ⁠ A Δ B ⁠, is the set of those elements that belong to ⁠
A ⁠ or ⁠ B ⁠ but not to both: A Δ B = ( A ∖ B ) ∪ ( B ∖ A ) . The set of all subsets of a set ⁠
U ⁠ is called the powerset of ⁠
U ⁠, often denoted ⁠ P ( U ) ⁠. The powerset is an algebraic structure whose main operations are union, intersection, set difference, symmetric difference and absolute complement (complement in ⁠
U ⁠). The powerset is a Boolean ring that has symmetric difference as addition, intersection as multiplication, the empty set as additive identity, ⁠
U ⁠ as multiplicative identity, and the subset itself as the additive inverse.
The powerset is also a Boolean algebra for which the join ⁠
∨ ⁠ is the union ⁠ ∪ ⁠, the meet ⁠ ∧ ⁠ is the intersection ⁠
∩ ⁠, and the negation is the set complement.
As for every Boolean algebra, the powerset is also a partially ordered set for set inclusion. It is also a complete lattice.
The axioms of these structures induce many identities relating subsets, which are detailed in the linked articles.
A function  ⁠ f ⁠ from a set ⁠ A ⁠ to a set ⁠ B ⁠ is a rule that assigns to each element of ⁠
A ⁠ a unique element of ⁠
B ⁠.  For example, the square function maps each real number ⁠
x ⁠ to ⁠ x 2 ⁠. The notation ⁠ f : A → B ⁠ denotes a function ⁠
f ⁠  from ⁠ A ⁠ to ⁠ B ⁠.  The result of applying ⁠
f ⁠ to an element ⁠ a ⁠ of ⁠ A ⁠ is denoted f ( a ) ; it is called the value of ⁠
f ⁠ at ⁠ a ⁠, or the image of ⁠ a ⁠ under ⁠ f ⁠.  The set ⁠ A ⁠ is called the domain of ⁠
f ⁠, and ⁠ B ⁠ is called the codomain of ⁠
f ⁠. The graph of a function ⁠
f : A → B ⁠ is the set of all ordered pairs ⁠
( a , f ( a ) ) ⁠ as ⁠ a ⁠ ranges over all elements of ⁠
A ⁠. It is a subset of the Cartesian product ⁠
A × B ⁠ defined below. For example, the graph of the square function is a parabola in ⁠
R × R = R 2 ⁠; it contains points such as ⁠
( 3 , 9 ) ⁠ and ⁠ ( − 4 , 16 ) ⁠. Once the domain and codomain are specified, the graph of ⁠
f ⁠ contains the same information as ⁠
f ⁠ itself. This point of view allows one to formally define 'function' in terms of sets.
Specifically, a function from ⁠
A ⁠ to ⁠ B ⁠ is a triple ( A , B , G ) of sets with ⁠ G ⊂ A × B ⁠ such that for every element ⁠
a ⁠ in ⁠ A ⁠, there exists a unique element ⁠
b ⁠ in ⁠ B ⁠ such that ⁠ ( a , b ) ∈ G ⁠.  (For functions from ⁠
R ⁠ to ⁠ R ⁠ especially, the condition on ⁠
G ⁠ is called the vertical line test.)
Intuitively, an indexed family is a set whose elements are labelled with the elements of another set, the index set. These labels allow the same element to occur several times in the family.
Formally, an indexed family is a function that has the index set as its domain. Generally, the usual functional notation ⁠
f ( x ) ⁠ is not used for indexed families. Instead, the element of the index set is written as a subscript of the name of the family, such as in ⁠
a i ⁠. When the index set is ⁠
{ 1 , 2 } ⁠, an indexed family is called an ordered pair. When the index set is the set of the ⁠
n ⁠ first natural numbers, an indexed family is called an ⁠
n ⁠-tuple. When the index set is the set of all natural numbers an indexed family is called a sequence.
In all these cases, the natural order of the natural numbers allows omitting indices for explicit indexed families. For example, ⁠
( b , 2 , b ) ⁠ denotes the 3-tuple ⁠
A ⁠ such that ⁠ A 1 = b , A 2 = 2 , A 3 = b ⁠. The above notations ⁠
⋃ A ∈ S A ⁠ and ⁠ ⋂ A ∈ S A ⁠ are commonly replaced with a notation involving indexed families, namely
⋃ i ∈ I A i = { x ∣ ( ∃ i ∈ I ) x ∈ A i } and ⋂ i ∈ I A i = { x ∣ ( ∀ i ∈ I ) x ∈ A i } . The formulas of the above sections are special cases of the formulas for indexed families, where ⁠
S = I ⁠ and ⁠ i = A = A i ⁠. The formulas remain correct, even in the case where ⁠
A i = A j ⁠ for some ⁠ i ≠ j ⁠, since ⁠ A = A ∪ A = A ∩ A ⁠. In § Basic operations, all elements of sets produced by set operations belong to previously defined sets. In this section, other set operations are considered, which produce sets whose elements can be outside all previously considered sets. These operations are Cartesian product, disjoint union, set exponentiation and power set.
Given sets ⁠ A ⁠ and ⁠ B ⁠, their Cartesian product (or simply product), denoted ⁠
A × B ⁠, is the set of all ordered pairs ⁠
( a , b ) ⁠ such that ⁠ a ∈ A ⁠ and ⁠ b ∈ B ⁠; that is, A × B = { ( a , b ) ∣ a ∈ A and b ∈ B } . The definition makes sense even if
A = B . One can likewise define
A × B × C as a set of ordered triples
( a , b , c ) , and likewise for any finite number of sets.
In fact, the number of sets does not have to be finite.
Given any indexed family of sets
( A i ) i ∈ I , the product ∏ i ∈ I A i is the set of all indexed families of elements
( a i ) i ∈ I such that a i ∈ A i for each i ∈ I . The axiom of choice implies that any product of nonempty sets is nonempty.
Given two sets ⁠ E ⁠ and ⁠ F ⁠, the set exponentiation, denoted ⁠
F E ⁠, is the set that has as elements all functions from ⁠
E ⁠ to ⁠ F ⁠. Equivalently, ⁠ F E ⁠ can be viewed as the Cartesian product of a family, indexed by ⁠
E ⁠, of sets that are all equal to ⁠
F ⁠. This explains the terminology and the notation, since exponentiation with integer exponents is a product where all factors are equal to the base.
The power set of a set ⁠
E ⁠ is the set that has all subsets of ⁠
E ⁠ as elements, including the empty set and ⁠
E ⁠ itself. It is often denoted ⁠
P ( E ) ⁠. For example, P ( { 1 , 2 , 3 } ) = { ∅ , { 1 } , { 2 } , { 3 } , { 1 , 2 } , { 1 , 3 } , { 2 , 3 } , { 1 , 2 , 3 } } . There is a natural one-to-one correspondence (bijection) between the subsets of ⁠
E ⁠ and the functions from ⁠
E ⁠ to ⁠ { 0 , 1 } ⁠; this correspondence associates to each subset the function that takes the value ⁠
1 ⁠ on the subset and ⁠
0 ⁠ elsewhere. Because of this correspondence, the power set of ⁠
E ⁠ is commonly identified with set exponentiation:
P ( E ) = { 0 , 1 } E . In this notation, ⁠ { 0 , 1 } ⁠ is often abbreviated as ⁠
2 ⁠, which gives P ( E ) = 2 E . In particular, if ⁠ E ⁠ has ⁠ n ⁠ elements, then ⁠ 2 E ⁠ has ⁠ 2 n ⁠ elements. The disjoint union of two or more sets is similar to the union, but, if two sets have elements in common, these elements are considered as distinct in the disjoint union. This is obtained by labelling the elements by the indexes of the set they are coming from.
The disjoint union of two sets ⁠
A ⁠ and ⁠ B ⁠ is commonly denoted ⁠
A ⊔ B ⁠ and is thus defined as
A ⊔ B = { ( a , i ) ∣ ( i = 1 ∧ a ∈ A ) ∨ ( i = 2 ∧ a ∈ B } . If ⁠ A = B ⁠ is a set with ⁠ n ⁠ elements, then ⁠ A ∪ A = A ⁠ has ⁠ n ⁠ elements, while ⁠ A ⊔ A ⁠ has ⁠ 2 n ⁠ elements. The disjoint union of two sets is a particular case of the disjoint union of an indexed family of sets, which is defined as
⨆ i ∈ I = { ( a , i ) ∣ i ∈ I ∧ a ∈ A i } . The disjoint union is the coproduct in the category of sets. Therefore  the notation
∐ i ∈ I = { ( a , i ) ∣ i ∈ I ∧ a ∈ A i } is commonly used. Given an indexed family of sets ⁠
( A i ) i ∈ I ⁠, there is a natural map
⨆ i ∈ I A i → ⋃ i ∈ I A i ( a , i ) ↦ a , which consists in "forgetting" the indices.
This map is always surjective; it is bijective if and only if the ⁠
A i ⁠ are pairwise disjoint, that is, all intersections of two sets of the family are empty. In this case, ⁠
⋃ i ∈ I A i ⁠ and ⁠ ⨆ i ∈ I A i ⁠ are commonly identified, and one says that their union is the disjoint union of the members of the family.
If a set is the disjoint union of a family of subsets, one says also that the family is a partition of the set.
Informally, the cardinality of a set ⁠
S ⁠, often denoted ⁠ | S | ⁠, is the number of its members. This number is the natural number ⁠
n ⁠ when there is a bijection between the set that is considered and the set ⁠
{ 1 , 2 , … , n } ⁠ of the first ⁠ n ⁠ natural numbers. The cardinality of the empty set is ⁠
0 ⁠. A set with the cardinality of a natural number is called a finite set, which applies in both cases. Otherwise, one has an infinite set.
The fact that natural numbers measure the cardinality of finite sets is the basis of the concept of natural number, and predates for several thousands years the concept of sets. A large part of combinatorics is devoted to the computation or estimation of the cardinality of finite sets.
The cardinality of an infinite set is commonly represented by a cardinal number, exactly as the number of elements of a finite set is represented by a natural numbers. The definition of cardinal numbers is too technical for this article; however, many properties of cardinalities can be dealt without referring to cardinal numbers, as follows.
Two sets ⁠ S ⁠ and ⁠ T ⁠ have the same cardinality if there exists a one-to-one correspondence (bijection) between them. This is denoted ⁠
| S | = | T | ⁠, and would be an equivalence relation on sets, if a set of all sets would exist.
For example, the natural numbers and the even natural numbers have the same cardinality, since multiplication by two provides such a bijection. Similarly, the interval ⁠
( − 1 , 1 ) ⁠ and the set of all real numbers have the same cardinality, a bijection being provided by the function ⁠
x ↦ tan ⁡ ( π x / 2 ) ⁠. Having the same cardinality of a proper subset is a characteristic property of infinite sets: a set is infinite if and only if it has the same cardinality as one of its proper subsets.
So, by the above example, the natural numbers form an infinite set.
Besides equality, there is a natural inequality between cardinalities: a set ⁠
S ⁠ has a cardinality smaller than or equal to the cardinality of another set ⁠
T ⁠ if there is an injection from ⁠
S ⁠ to ⁠ T ⁠. This is denoted ⁠ | S | ≤ | T | ⁠. Schröder–Bernstein theorem implies that ⁠
| S | ≤ | T | ⁠ and ⁠ | T | ≤ | S | ⁠ imply ⁠ | S | = | T | ⁠. Also, one has ⁠ | S | ≤ | T | ⁠, if and only if there is a surjection from ⁠
T ⁠ to ⁠ S ⁠. For every two sets ⁠
S ⁠ and ⁠ T ⁠, one has either ⁠ | S | ≤ | T | ⁠ or ⁠ | T | ≤ | S | ⁠. So, inequality of cardinalities is a total order.
The cardinality of the set ⁠
N ⁠ of the natural numbers, denoted ⁠
| N | = ℵ 0 ⁠, is the smallest infinite cardinality. This means that if ⁠
S ⁠ is a set of natural numbers, then either ⁠
S ⁠ is finite or ⁠ | S | = | N | ⁠. Sets with cardinality less than or equal to ⁠
| N | = ℵ 0 ⁠ are called countable sets; these are either finite sets or countably infinite sets (sets of cardinality ⁠
ℵ 0 ⁠); some authors use "countable" to mean "countably infinite". Sets with cardinality strictly greater than ⁠
ℵ 0 ⁠ are called uncountable sets.
Cantor's diagonal argument shows that, for every set ⁠
S ⁠, its power set (the set of its subsets) ⁠
2 S ⁠ has a greater cardinality:
| S | < | 2 S | . This implies that there is no greatest cardinality.
The cardinality of set of the real numbers is called the cardinality of the continuum and denoted ⁠
c ⁠. (The term "continuum" referred to the real line before the 20th century, when the real line was not commonly viewed as a set of numbers.)
Since, as seen above, the real line ⁠
R ⁠ has the same cardinality of an open interval, every subset of ⁠
R ⁠ that contains a nonempty open interval also has the cardinality ⁠
c ⁠. One has c = 2 ℵ 0 , meaning that the cardinality of the real numbers equals the cardinality of the power set of the natural numbers. In particular,
c > ℵ 0 . When published in 1878 by Georg Cantor, this result was so astonishing that it was rejected by mathematicians, and several decades were needed before its common acceptance.
It can be shown that ⁠
c ⁠ is also the cardinality of the entire plane, and of any finite-dimensional Euclidean space.
The continuum hypothesis, a conjecture formulated by Georg Cantor in 1878, states that there is no set with cardinality strictly between ⁠
ℵ 0 ⁠ and ⁠ c ⁠. In 1963, Paul Cohen proved that the continuum hypothesis is independent of the axioms of Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory with the axiom of choice.
This means that if the most widely used set theory is consistent (that is not self-contradictory), then the same is true for both the set theory with the continuum hypothesis added as a further axiom, and the set theory with the negation of the continuum hypothesis added.
Informally, the axiom of choice says that, given any family of nonempty sets, one can choose simultaneously an element in each of them. Formulated this way, acceptability of this axiom sets a foundational logical question, because of the difficulty of conceiving an infinite instantaneous action. However, there are several equivalent formulations that are much less controversial and have strong consequences in many areas of mathematics. In the present days, the axiom of choice is thus commonly accepted in mainstream mathematics.
A more formal statement of the axiom of choice is: the Cartesian product of every indexed family of nonempty sets is non empty.
Other equivalent forms are described in the following subsections.
Zorn's lemma is an assertion that is equivalent to the axiom of choice under the other axioms of set theory, and is easier to use in usual mathematics.
Let ⁠ S ⁠ be a partial ordered set. A chain in ⁠
S ⁠ is a subset that is totally ordered under the induced order. Zorn's lemma states that, if every chain in ⁠
S ⁠ has an upper bound in ⁠
S ⁠, then ⁠ S ⁠ has (at least) a maximal element, that is, an element that is not smaller than another element of ⁠
S ⁠. In most uses of Zorn's lemma, ⁠
S ⁠ is a set of sets, the order is set inclusion, and the upperbound of a chain is taken as the union of its members.
An example of use of Zorn's lemma, is the proof that every vector space has a basis. Here the elements of ⁠
S ⁠ are linearly independent subsets of the vector space. The union of a chain of elements of ⁠
S ⁠ is linearly independent, since an infinite set is linearly independent if and only if each finite subset is, and every finite subset of the union of a chain must be included in a member of the chain. So, there exist a maximal linearly independent set. This linearly independent set must span the vector space because of maximality, and is therefore a basis.
Another classical use of Zorn's lemma is the proof that every proper ideal—that is, an ideal that is not the whole ring—of a ring is contained in a maximal ideal. Here, ⁠
S ⁠ is the set of the proper ideals containing the given ideal. The union of chain of ideals is an ideal, since the axioms of an ideal involve a finite number of elements. The union of a chain of proper ideals is a proper ideal, since otherwise ⁠
1 ⁠ would belong to the union, and this implies that it would belong to a member of the chain.
The axiom of choice is equivalent with the fact that a well-order can be defined on every set, where a well-order is a total order such that every nonempty subset has a least element.
Simple examples of well-ordered sets are the natural numbers (with the natural order), and, for every ⁠
n ⁠, the set of the ⁠ n ⁠-tuples of natural numbers, with the lexicographic order.
Well-orders allow a generalization of mathematical induction, which is called transfinite induction. Given a property (predicate) ⁠
P ( n ) ⁠ depending on a natural number, mathematical induction is the fact that for proving that ⁠
P ( n ) ⁠ is always true, it suffices to prove that for every ⁠
n ⁠, ( m < n ⟹ P ( m ) ) ⟹ P ( n ) . Transfinite induction is the same, replacing natural numbers by the elements of a well-ordered set.
Often, a proof by transfinite induction easier if three cases are proved separately, the two first cases being the same as for usual induction:
⁠ P ( 0 ) ⁠ is true, where ⁠ 0 ⁠ denotes the least element of the well-ordered set
⁠ P ( x ) ⟹ P ( S ( x ) ) ⁠, where ⁠ S ( x ) ⁠ denotes the successor of ⁠
x ⁠, that is the least element that is greater than ⁠
x ⁠ ⁠ ( ∀ y ; y < x ⟹ P ( y ) ) ⟹ P ( x ) ⁠, when ⁠ x ⁠ is not a successor.
--- Subset --- In mathematics, a set A is a subset of a set B if and only if all elements of A are also elements of B; B is then a superset of A. It is possible for A and B to be equal; if they are unequal, then A is a proper subset of B. The relationship of one set being a subset of another is called inclusion (or sometimes containment). A is a subset of B may also be expressed as B includes (or contains) A or A is included (or contained) in B. A k-subset is a subset with k elements.
When quantified, A ⊆ B is represented as ∀ x ( x ∈ A ⇒ x ∈ B ) . One can prove the statement
A ⊆ B by applying a proof technique known as the element argument:Let sets A and B be given. To prove that
A ⊆ B , suppose that a is a particular but arbitrarily chosen element of A
show that a is an element of B.
The validity of this technique can be seen as a consequence of universal generalization: the technique shows
( c ∈ A ) ⇒ ( c ∈ B ) for an arbitrarily chosen element c. Universal generalisation then implies
∀ x ( x ∈ A ⇒ x ∈ B ) , which is equivalent to
A ⊆ B , as stated above. If A and B are sets and every element of A is also an element of B, then:
A is a subset of B, denoted by
A ⊆ B , or equivalently, B is a superset of A, denoted by
B ⊇ A . If A is a subset of B, but A is not equal to B (i.e. there exists at least one element of B which is not an element of A), then:
A is a proper (or strict) subset of B, denoted by
A ⊊ B , or equivalently, B is a proper (or strict) superset of A, denoted by
B ⊋ A . The empty set, written
{ } or ∅ , has no elements, and therefore is vacuously a subset of any set X.
Reflexivity: Given any set
A , A ⊆ A Transitivity: If A ⊆ B and B ⊆ C , then A ⊆ C Antisymmetry: If A ⊆ B and B ⊆ A , then A = B . Irreflexivity: Given any set
A , A ⊊ A is False. Transitivity: If A ⊊ B and B ⊊ C , then A ⊊ C Asymmetry: If A ⊊ B then B ⊊ A is False. Some authors use the symbols
⊂ and ⊃ to indicate subset and superset respectively; that is, with the same meaning as and instead of the symbols
⊆ and ⊇ . For example, for these authors, it is true of every set A that
A ⊂ A . (a reflexive relation).
Other authors prefer to use the symbols
⊂ and ⊃ to indicate proper (also called strict) subset and proper superset respectively; that is, with the same meaning as and instead of the symbols
⊊ and ⊋ . This usage makes ⊆ and ⊂ analogous to the inequality symbols
≤ and < . For example, if x ≤ y , then x may or may not equal y, but if
x < y , then x definitely does not equal y, and is less than y (an irreflexive relation). Similarly, using the convention that
⊂ is proper subset, if A ⊆ B , then A may or may not equal B, but if
A ⊂ B , then A definitely does not equal B.
The set A = {1, 2} is a proper subset of B = {1, 2, 3}, thus both expressions
A ⊆ B and A ⊊ B are true. The set D = {1, 2, 3} is a subset (but not a proper subset) of E = {1, 2, 3}, thus
D ⊆ E is true, and D ⊊ E is not true (false). The set {x: x is a prime number greater than 10} is a proper subset of {x: x is an odd number greater than 10}
The set of natural numbers is a proper subset of the set of rational numbers; likewise, the set of points in a line segment is a proper subset of the set of points in a line. These are two examples in which both the subset and the whole set are infinite, and the subset has the same cardinality (the concept that corresponds to size, that is, the number of elements, of a finite set) as the whole; such cases can run counter to one's initial intuition.
The set of rational numbers is a proper subset of the set of real numbers. In this example, both sets are infinite, but the latter set has a larger cardinality (or power) than the former set.
Another example in an Euler diagram:
The set of all subsets of
S is called its power set, and is denoted by
P ( S ) . The inclusion relation
⊆ is a partial order on the set
P ( S ) defined by A ≤ B ⟺ A ⊆ B . We may also partially order
P ( S ) by reverse set inclusion by defining
A ≤ B if and only if B ⊆ A . For the power set P ⁡ ( S ) of a set S, the inclusion partial order is—up to an order isomorphism—the Cartesian product of
k = | S | (the cardinality of S) copies of the partial order on
{ 0 , 1 } for which 0 < 1. This can be illustrated by enumerating
S = { s 1 , s 2 , … , s k } , , and associating with each subset
T ⊆ S (i.e., each element of
2 S ) the k-tuple from { 0 , 1 } k , of which the ith coordinate is 1 if and only if
s i is a member of T. The set of all k -subsets of A is denoted by ( A k ) , in analogue with the notation for binomial coefficients, which count the number of
k -subsets of an n -element set. In set theory, the notation
[ A ] k is also common, especially when
k is a transfinite cardinal number.
A  set A is a subset of B if and only if their intersection is equal to A. Formally:
A ⊆ B if and only if A ∩ B = A . A  set A is a subset of B if and only if their union is equal to B. Formally:
A ⊆ B if and only if A ∪ B = B . A finite set A is a subset of B, if and only if the cardinality of their intersection is equal to the cardinality of A. Formally:
A ⊆ B if and only if | A ∩ B | = | A | . The subset relation defines a partial order on sets. In fact, the subsets of a given set form a Boolean algebra under the subset relation, in which the join and meet are given by intersection and union, and the subset relation itself is the Boolean inclusion relation.
Inclusion is the canonical partial order, in the sense that every partially ordered set
( X , ⪯ ) is isomorphic to some collection of sets ordered by inclusion. The ordinal numbers are a simple example: if each ordinal n is identified with the set
[ n ] of all ordinals less than or equal to n, then
a ≤ b if and only if [ a ] ⊆ [ b ] . Convex subset – In geometry, set whose intersection with every line is a single line segmentPages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets

--- Power set --- In mathematics, the power set (or powerset) of a set S is the set of all subsets of S, including the empty set and S itself. In axiomatic set theory (as developed, for example, in the ZFC axioms), the existence of the power set of any set is postulated by the axiom of power set.
The powerset of S is variously denoted as P(S), 𝒫(S), P(S),
P ( S ) , or 2S. Any subset of P(S) is called a family of sets over S.
If S is the set {x, y, z}, then all the subsets of S are
{} (the empty set, also denoted
∅ or ∅ ) {x} {y} {z} {x, y} {x, z} {y, z} {x, y, z} and hence the power set of S is {{},
{x}, {y}, {z}, {x, y}, {x, z}, {y, z}, {x, y, z}}. If S is a finite set with the cardinality |S| = n (i.e., the number of all elements in the set S is n), then the number of all the subsets of S is |P(S)| = 2n. This fact, as well as the reason for the notation 2S denoting the power set P(S), are demonstrated below.
An indicator function or a characteristic function of a subset A of a set S with the cardinality |S| = n is a function from S to the two-element set {0, 1}, denoted as IA : S → {0, 1}, and it indicates whether an element of S belongs to A or not; If x in S belongs to A, then IA(x) = 1, and 0 otherwise. Each subset A of S is identified by or equivalent to the indicator function IA, and {0,1}S as the set of all the functions from S to {0, 1} consists of all the indicator functions of all the subsets of S. In other words, {0, 1}S is equivalent or bijective to the power set P(S). Since each element in S corresponds to either 0 or 1 under any function in {0, 1}S, the number of all the functions in {0, 1}S is 2n. Since the number 2 can be defined as {0, 1} (see, for example, von Neumann ordinals), the P(S) is also denoted as 2S. Obviously |2S| = 2|S| holds. Generally speaking, XY is the set of all functions from Y to X and |XY| = |X||Y|.
Cantor's diagonal argument shows that the power set of a set (whether infinite or not) always has strictly higher cardinality than the set itself (or informally, the power set must be larger than the original set). In particular, Cantor's theorem shows that the power set of a countably infinite set is uncountably infinite. The power set of the set of natural numbers can be put in a one-to-one correspondence with the set of real numbers (see Cardinality of the continuum).
The power set of a set S, together with the operations of union, intersection and complement, is a σ-algebra over S and can be viewed as the prototypical example of a Boolean algebra. In fact, one can show that any finite Boolean algebra is isomorphic to the Boolean algebra of the power set of a finite set. For infinite Boolean algebras, this is no longer true, but every infinite Boolean algebra can be represented as a subalgebra of a power set Boolean algebra (see Stone's representation theorem).
The power set of a set S forms an abelian group when it is considered with the operation of symmetric difference (with the empty set as the identity element and each set being its own inverse), and a commutative monoid when considered with the operation of intersection (with the entire set S as the identity element). It can hence be shown, by proving the distributive laws, that the power set considered together with both of these operations forms a Boolean ring.
In set theory, XY is the notation representing the set of all functions from Y to X.  As "2" can be defined as {0, 1} (see, for example, von Neumann ordinals), 2S (i.e., {0, 1}S) is the set of all functions from S to {0, 1}. As shown above, 2S and the power set of S, P(S), are considered identical set-theoretically.
This equivalence can be applied to the example above, in which S = {x, y, z}, to get the isomorphism with the binary representations of numbers from 0 to 2n − 1, with n being the number of elements in the set S or |S| = n. First, the enumerated set { (x, 1), (y, 2), (z, 3) } is defined in which the number in each ordered pair represents the position of the paired element of S in a sequence of binary digits such as {x, y} = 011(2); x of S is located at the first from the right of this sequence and y is at the second from the right, and 1 in the sequence means the element of S corresponding to the position of it in the sequence exists in the subset of S for the sequence while 0 means it does not.
For the whole power set of S, we get:
Such an injective mapping from P(S) to integers is arbitrary, so this representation of all the subsets of S is not unique, but the sort order of the enumerated set does not change its cardinality. (E.g., { (y, 1), (z, 2), (x, 3) } can be used to construct another injective mapping from P(S) to the integers without changing the number of one-to-one correspondences.)
However, such finite binary representation is only possible if S can be enumerated. (In this example, x, y, and z are enumerated with 1, 2, and 3 respectively as the position of binary digit sequences.) The enumeration is possible even if S has an infinite cardinality (i.e., the number of elements in S is infinite), such as the set of integers or rationals, but not possible for example if S is the set of real numbers, in which case we cannot enumerate all irrational numbers.
The binomial theorem is closely related to the power set. A k–elements combination from some set is another name for a k–elements subset, so the number of combinations, denoted as C(n, k) (also called binomial coefficient) is a number of subsets with k elements in a set with n elements; in other words it's the number of sets with k elements which are elements of the power set of a set with n elements.
For example, the power set of a set with three elements, has:
C(3, 0) = 1 subset with 0 elements (the empty subset),
C(3, 1) = 3 subsets with 1 element (the singleton subsets),
C(3, 2) = 3 subsets with 2 elements (the complements of the singleton subsets),
C(3, 3) = 1 subset with 3 elements (the original set itself).
Using this relationship, we can compute |2S| using the formula:
| 2 S | = ∑ k = 0 | S | ( | S | k ) Therefore, one can deduce the following identity, assuming |S| = n:
| 2 S | = 2 n = ∑ k = 0 n ( n k ) If S is a finite set, then a recursive definition of P(S) proceeds as follows:
If S = {}, then P(S) = { {} }.
Otherwise, let e ∈ S and T = S ∖ {e}; then P(S) = P(T) ∪ {t ∪ {e} : t ∈ P(T)}.
In words: The power set of the empty set is a singleton whose only element is the empty set.
For a non-empty set S, let
e be any element of the set and T its relative complement; then the power set of S is a union of a power set of T and a power set of T whose each element is expanded with the e element.
The set of subsets of S of cardinality less than or equal to κ is sometimes denoted by Pκ(S) or [S]κ, and the set of subsets with cardinality strictly less than κ is sometimes denoted P<κ(S) or [S]<κ. Similarly, the set of non-empty subsets of S might be denoted by P≥1(S) or P+(S).
A set can be regarded as an algebra having no nontrivial operations or defining equations.  From this perspective, the concept of the power set of X as the set of all subsets of X generalizes naturally to the set to all subalgebras of an algebraic structure or algebra.
The power set of a set, when ordered by inclusion, is always a complete atomic Boolean algebra, and every complete atomic Boolean algebra arises as the lattice of all subsets of some set. The generalization to arbitrary algebras is that the set of subalgebras of an algebra, again ordered by inclusion, is always an algebraic lattice, and every algebraic lattice arises as the lattice of subalgebras of some algebra. So in that regard, subalgebras behave analogously to subsets.
However, there are two important properties of subsets that do not carry over to subalgebras in general.  First, although the subsets of a set form a set (as well as a lattice), in some classes it may not be possible to organize the subalgebras of an algebra as itself an algebra in that class, although they can always be organized as a lattice.  Secondly, whereas the subsets of a set are in bijection with the functions from that set to the set {0, 1} = 2, there is no guarantee that a class of algebras contains an algebra that can play the role of 2 in this way.
Certain classes of algebras enjoy both of these properties.  The first property is more common; the case of having both is relatively rare.  One class that does have both is that of multigraphs.  Given two multigraphs G and H, a homomorphism h : G → H consists of two functions, one mapping vertices to vertices and the other mapping edges to edges.  The set HG of homomorphisms from G to H can then be organized as the graph whose vertices and edges are respectively the vertex and edge functions appearing in that set.  Furthermore, the subgraphs of a multigraph G are in bijection with the graph homomorphisms from G to the multigraph Ω definable as the complete directed graph on two vertices (hence four edges, namely two self-loops and two more edges forming a cycle) augmented with a fifth edge, namely a second self-loop at one of the vertices.  We can therefore organize the subgraphs of G as the multigraph ΩG, called the power object of G.
What is special about a multigraph as an algebra is that its operations are unary.  A multigraph has two sorts of elements forming a set V of vertices and E of edges, and has two unary operations s, t : E → V giving the source (start) and target (end) vertices of each edge.  An algebra all of whose operations are unary is called a presheaf.  Every class of presheaves contains a presheaf Ω that plays the role for subalgebras that 2 plays for subsets.  Such a class is a special case of the more general notion of elementary topos as a category that is closed (and moreover cartesian closed) and has an object Ω, called a subobject classifier.  Although the term "power object" is sometimes used synonymously with exponential object YX, in topos theory Y is required to be Ω.
There is both a covariant and contravariant power set functor, P: Set → Set and P: Set op → Set. The covariant functor is defined more simply as the functor which sends a set S to P(S) and a morphism f: S → T (here, a function between sets) to the image morphism. That is, for
A = { x 1 , x 2 , . . . } ∈ P ( S ) , P f ( A ) = { f ( x 1 ) , f ( x 2 ) , . . . } ∈ P ( T ) . Elsewhere in this article, the power set was defined as the set of functions of S into the set with 2 elements. Formally, this defines a natural isomorphism
P ¯ ≅ Set ( − , 2 ) . The contravariant power set functor is different from the covariant version in that it sends f to the preimage morphism, so that if
f ( A ) = B ⊆ T , P ¯ f ( B ) = A . This is because a general functor
C ( − , c ) takes a morphism h : a → b to precomposition by h, so a function
h ∗ : C ( b , c ) → C ( a , c ) , which takes morphisms from b to c and takes them to morphisms from a to c, through b via h.
In category theory and the theory of elementary topoi, the universal quantifier can be understood as the right adjoint of a functor between power sets, the inverse image functor of a function between sets; likewise, the existential quantifier is the left adjoint.

--- Union (set theory) ---
In set theory, the union (denoted by ∪) of a collection of sets is the set of all elements in the collection. It is one of the fundamental operations through which sets can be combined and related to each other.
A nullary union refers to a union of zero (⁠
0 ⁠) sets and it is by definition equal to the empty set.
For explanation of the symbols used in this article, refer to the table of mathematical symbols.
The union of two sets A and B is the set of elements which are in A, in B, or in both A and B.  In set-builder notation,
A ∪ B = { x : x ∈ A or x ∈ B } . For example, if A = {1, 3, 5, 7} and B = {1, 2, 4, 6, 7} then A ∪ B = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7}.  A more elaborate example (involving two infinite sets) is:
A = {x is an even integer greater than 1}
B = {x is an odd integer greater than 1}
A ∪ B = { 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , … } As another example, the number 9 is not contained in the union of the set of prime numbers {2, 3, 5, 7, 11, ...} and the set of even numbers {2, 4, 6, 8, 10, ...}, because 9 is neither prime nor even.
Sets cannot have duplicate elements, so the union of the sets {1, 2, 3} and {2, 3, 4} is {1, 2, 3, 4}.
One can take the union of several sets simultaneously.  For example, the union of three sets A, B, and C contains all elements of A, all elements of B, and all elements of C, and nothing else. Thus, x is an element of A ∪ B ∪ C if and only if x is in at least one of A, B, and C.
A finite union is the union of a finite number of sets; the phrase does not imply that the union set is a finite set.
The notation for the general concept can vary considerably.  For a finite union of sets
S 1 , S 2 , S 3 , … , S n one often writes S 1 ∪ S 2 ∪ S 3 ∪ ⋯ ∪ S n or ⋃ i = 1 n S i {\textstyle \bigcup _{i=1}^{n}S_{i}}
.  Various common notations for arbitrary unions include
⋃ M {\textstyle \bigcup \mathbf {M} }
, ⋃ A ∈ M A {\textstyle \bigcup _{A\in \mathbf {M} }A}
, and ⋃ i ∈ I A i {\textstyle \bigcup _{i\in I}A_{i}}
. The last of these notations refers to the union of the collection
{ A i : i ∈ I } , where I is an index set and
A i is a set for every ⁠ i ∈ I ⁠. In the case that the index set I is the set of natural numbers, one uses the notation
⋃ i = 1 ∞ A i {\textstyle \bigcup _{i=1}^{\infty }A_{i}}
, which is analogous to that of the infinite sums in series.
When the symbol "∪" is placed before other symbols (instead of between them), it is usually rendered as a larger size.
In Unicode, union is represented by the character U+222A ∪ UNION. In TeX,
∪ is rendered from \cup and
⋃ {\textstyle \bigcup }
is rendered from \bigcup.
The most general notion is the union of an arbitrary collection of sets, sometimes called an infinitary union. If M is a set or class whose elements are sets, then x is an element of the union of M if and only if there is at least one element A of M such that x is an element of A. In symbols:
x ∈ ⋃ M ⟺ ∃ A ∈ M , x ∈ A . This idea subsumes the preceding sections—for example, A ∪ B ∪ C is the union of the collection {A, B, C}. Also, if M is the empty collection, then the union of M is the empty set.
In Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory (ZFC) and other set theories, the ability to take the arbitrary union of any sets is granted by the axiom of union, which states that, given any set of sets
A , there exists a set B , whose elements are exactly those of the elements of
A . Sometimes this axiom is less specific, where there exists a
B which contains the elements of the elements of
A , but may be larger. For example if
A = { { 1 } , { 2 } } , then it may be that B = { 1 , 2 , 3 } since B contains 1 and 2. This can be fixed by using the axiom of specification to get the subset of
B whose elements are exactly those of the elements of
A . Then one can use the axiom of extensionality to show that this set is unique. For readability, define the binary predicate
Union ⁡ ( X , Y ) meaning " X is the union of Y " or " X = ⋃ Y " as: Union ⁡ ( X , Y ) ⟺ ∀ x ( x ∈ X ⟺ ∃ y ∈ Y ( x ∈ y ) ) Then, one can prove the statement "for all
Y , there is a unique X , such that X is the union of Y ": ∀ Y ∃ ! X ( Union ⁡ ( X , Y ) ) Then, one can use an extension by definition to add the union operator
⋃ A to the language of ZFC as:
B = ⋃ A ⟺ Union ⁡ ( B , A ) ⟺ ∀ x ( x ∈ B ⟺ ∃ y ∈ Y ( x ∈ y ) ) or equivalently: x ∈ ⋃ A ⟺ ∃ y ∈ A ( x ∈ y ) After the union operator has been defined, the binary union
A ∪ B can be defined by showing there exists a unique set
C = { A , B } using the axiom of pairing, and defining
A ∪ B = ⋃ { A , B } . Then, finite unions can be defined inductively as:
⋃ i = 1 0 A i = ∅ , and ⋃ i = 1 n A i = ( ⋃ i = 1 n − 1 A i ) ∪ A n Binary union is an associative operation; that is, for any sets ⁠
A , B , and C ⁠, A ∪ ( B ∪ C ) = ( A ∪ B ) ∪ C . Thus, the parentheses may be omitted without ambiguity: either of the above can be written as ⁠
A ∪ B ∪ C ⁠. Also, union is commutative, so the sets can be written in any order.
The empty set is an identity element for the operation of union. That is, ⁠
A ∪ ∅ = A ⁠, for any set ⁠ A ⁠. Also, the union operation is idempotent: ⁠
A ∪ A = A ⁠.  All these properties follow from analogous facts about logical disjunction.
Intersection distributes over union
A ∩ ( B ∪ C ) = ( A ∩ B ) ∪ ( A ∩ C ) and union distributes over intersection
A ∪ ( B ∩ C ) = ( A ∪ B ) ∩ ( A ∪ C ) . The power set of a set ⁠
U ⁠, together with the operations given by union, intersection, and complementation, is a Boolean algebra.  In this Boolean algebra, union can be expressed in terms of intersection and complementation by the formula
A ∪ B = ( A ∁ ∩ B ∁ ) ∁ , where the superscript
∁ denotes the complement in the universal set ⁠
U ⁠. Alternatively, intersection can be expressed in terms of union and complementation in a similar way:
A ∩ B = ( A ∁ ∪ B ∁ ) ∁ . These two expressions together are called De Morgan's laws.
The english word union comes from the term in middle French meaning "coming together", which comes from the post-classical Latin unionem, "oneness". The original term for union in set theory was Vereinigung (in german), which was introduced in 1895 by Georg Cantor. The english use of union of two sets in mathematics began to be used by at least 1912, used by James Pierpont. The symbol
∪ used for union in mathematics was introduced by Giuseppe Peano in his Arithmetices principia in 1889, along with the notations for intersection
∩ , set membership ∈ , and subsets ⊂ . 

In set theory, the intersection of two sets
A and B , denoted by A ∩ B , is the set containing all elements of
A that also belong to B or equivalently, all elements of
B that also belong to A . The notion of intersection as an algebraic operation with sets as operands has been generalized from geometry, where it is encountered in the case of geometric sets of points, such as individual points, lines (infinite uncountable sets of points), planes, etc.
Intersection is written using the symbol "
∩ " between the terms; that is, in infix notation. For example:
{ 1 , 2 , 3 } ∩ { 2 , 3 , 4 } = { 2 , 3 } { 1 , 2 , 3 } ∩ { 4 , 5 , 6 } = ∅ Z ∩ N = N { x ∈ R : x 2 = 1 } ∩ N = { 1 } The intersection of more than two sets (generalized intersection) can be written as:
⋂ i = 1 n A i which is similar to capital-sigma notation.
For an explanation of the symbols used in this article, refer to the table of mathematical symbols.
The intersection of two sets
A and B , denoted by A ∩ B , is the set of all objects that are members of both the sets
A and B . In symbols: A ∩ B = { x : x ∈ A and x ∈ B } . That is, x is an element of the intersection
A ∩ B if and only if x is both an element of
A and an element of B . For example: The intersection of the sets {1, 2, 3} and {2, 3, 4} is {2, 3}.
The number 9 is not in the intersection of the set of prime numbers {2, 3, 5, 7, 11, ...} and the set of odd numbers {1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, ...}, because 9 is not prime.
The intersection of two geometric sets of points such as two lines is a singleton set of one point for distinct non-parallel lines in the same plane.
We say that A intersects (meets) B if there exists some x that is an element of both
A and B , in which case we also say that
A intersects (meets) B at x . Equivalently, A intersects B if their intersection
A ∩ B is an inhabited set, meaning that there exists some
x such that x ∈ A ∩ B . We say that A and B are disjoint if A does not intersect B . In plain language, they have no elements in common.
A and B are disjoint if their intersection is empty, denoted
A ∩ B = ∅ . For example: the sets { 1 , 2 } and { 3 , 4 } are disjoint, while the set of even numbers intersects the set of multiples of 3 at the multiples of 6.
two parallel lines in the same plane are disjoint.
Binary intersection is an associative operation; that is, for any sets
A , B , and C , one has A ∩ ( B ∩ C ) = ( A ∩ B ) ∩ C . Thus the parentheses may be omitted without ambiguity: either of the above can be written as
A ∩ B ∩ C . Intersection is also commutative. That is, for any
A and B , one has A ∩ B = B ∩ A . The intersection of any set with the empty set results in the empty set; that is, that for any set
A , A ∩ ∅ = ∅ Also, the intersection operation is idempotent; that is, any set
A satisfies that A ∩ A = A . All these properties follow from analogous facts about logical conjunction.
Intersection distributes over union and union distributes over intersection. That is, for any sets
A , B , and C , one has A ∩ ( B ∪ C ) = ( A ∩ B ) ∪ ( A ∩ C ) A ∪ ( B ∩ C ) = ( A ∪ B ) ∩ ( A ∪ C ) Inside a universe U , one may define the complement
A c of A to be the set of all elements of
U not in A . Furthermore, the intersection of
A and B may be written as the complement of the union of their complements, derived easily from De Morgan's laws:
A ∩ B = ( A c ∪ B c ) c The most general notion is the intersection of an arbitrary nonempty collection of sets.
If M is a nonempty set whose elements are themselves sets, then
x is an element of the intersection of
M if and only if for every element
A of M , x is an element of A . In symbols: ( x ∈ ⋂ A ∈ M A ) ⇔ ( ∀ A ∈ M , x ∈ A ) . The notation for this last concept can vary considerably. Set theorists will sometimes write "
⋂ M ", while others will instead write "
⋂ A ∈ M A ". The latter notation can be generalized to "
⋂ i ∈ I A i ", which refers to the intersection of the collection
{ A i : i ∈ I } . Here I is a nonempty set, and
A i is a set for every i ∈ I . In the case that the index set
I is the set of natural numbers, notation analogous to that of an infinite product may be seen:
⋂ i = 1 ∞ A i . When formatting is difficult, this can also be written "
A 1 ∩ A 2 ∩ A 3 ∩ ⋯ ".  This last example, an intersection of countably many sets, is actually very common; for an example, see the article on σ-algebras.
In the previous section, we excluded the case where
M was the empty set ( ∅ ). The reason is as follows: The intersection of the collection
M is defined as the set (see set-builder notation)
⋂ A ∈ M A = { x : for all A ∈ M , x ∈ A } . If M is empty, there are no sets
A in M , so the question becomes "which
x 's satisfy the stated condition?" The answer seems to be every possible
x . When M is empty, the condition given above is an example of a vacuous truth. So the intersection of the empty family should be the universal set (the identity element for the operation of intersection),
but in standard (ZF) set theory, the universal set does not exist.
However, when restricted to the context of subsets of a given fixed set
X , the notion of the intersection of an empty collection of subsets of
X is well-defined.  In that case, if
M is empty, its intersection is
⋂ M = ⋂ ∅ = { x ∈ X : x ∈ A for all A ∈ ∅ } .  Since all x ∈ X vacuously satisfy the required condition, the intersection of the empty collection of subsets of
X is all of X . In formulas, ⋂ ∅ = X . This matches the intuition that as collections of subsets become smaller, their respective intersections become larger; in the extreme case, the empty collection has an intersection equal to the whole underlying set.
Also, in type theory x is of a prescribed type
τ , so the intersection is understood to be of type
s e t τ (the type of sets whose elements are in
τ ), and we can define ⋂ A ∈ ∅ A to be the universal set of
s e t τ (the set whose elements are exactly all terms of type
τ ). In set theory, the complement of a set A, often denoted by
A c (or A′), is the set of elements not in A.
When all elements in the universe, i.e. all elements under consideration, are considered to be members of a given set U, the absolute complement of A is the set of elements in U that are not in A.
The relative complement of A with respect to a set B, also termed the set difference of B and A, written
B ∖ A , is the set of elements in B that are not in A.
If A is a set, then the absolute complement of A (or simply the complement of A) is the set of elements not in A (within a larger set that is implicitly defined). In other words, let U be a set that contains all the elements under study; if there is no need to mention U, either because it has been previously specified, or it is obvious and unique, then the absolute complement of A is the relative complement of A in U:
A c = U ∖ A = { x ∈ U : x ∉ A } . The absolute complement of A is usually denoted by
A c . Other notations include
A ¯ , A ′ , ∁ U A , and ∁ A . Assume that the universe is the set of integers. If A is the set of odd numbers, then the complement of A is the set of even numbers. If B is the set of multiples of 3, then the complement of B is the set of numbers congruent to 1 or 2 modulo 3 (or, in simpler terms, the integers that are not multiples of 3).
Assume that the universe is the standard 52-card deck. If the set A is the suit of spades, then the complement of A is the union of the suits of clubs, diamonds, and hearts. If the set B is the union of the suits of clubs and diamonds, then the complement of B is the union of the suits of hearts and spades.
When the universe is the universe of sets described in formalized set theory, the absolute complement of a set is generally not itself a set, but rather a proper class.  For more info, see universal set.
Let A and B be two sets in a universe U. The following identities capture important properties of absolute complements:
De Morgan's laws: ( A ∪ B ) c = A c ∩ B c . ( A ∩ B ) c = A c ∪ B c . Complement laws: A ∪ A c = U . A ∩ A c = ∅ . ∅ c = U . U c = ∅ . If A ⊆ B , then B c ⊆ A c . (this follows from the equivalence of a conditional with its contrapositive).
Involution or double complement law:
( A c ) c = A . Relationships between relative and absolute complements:
A ∖ B = A ∩ B c . ( A ∖ B ) c = A c ∪ B = A c ∪ ( B ∩ A ) . Relationship with a set difference:
A c ∖ B c = B ∖ A . The first two complement laws above show that if A is a non-empty, proper subset of U, then {A, A∁} is a partition of U.
If A and B are sets, then the relative complement of A in B, also termed the set difference of B and A, is the set of elements in B but not in A.
The relative complement of A in B is denoted
B ∖ A according to the ISO 31-11 standard. It is sometimes written
B − A , but this notation is ambiguous, as in some contexts (for example, Minkowski set operations in functional analysis) it can be interpreted as the set of all elements
b − a , where b is taken from B and a from A.
Formally: B ∖ A = { x ∈ B : x ∉ A } . { 1 , 2 , 3 } ∖ { 2 , 3 , 4 } = { 1 } . { 2 , 3 , 4 } ∖ { 1 , 2 , 3 } = { 4 } . If R is the set of real numbers and
Q is the set of rational numbers, then
R ∖ Q is the set of irrational numbers.
Let A, B, and C be three sets in a universe U. The following identities capture notable properties of relative complements:
C ∖ ( A ∩ B ) = ( C ∖ A ) ∪ ( C ∖ B ) . C ∖ ( A ∪ B ) = ( C ∖ A ) ∩ ( C ∖ B ) . C ∖ ( B ∖ A ) = ( C ∩ A ) ∪ ( C ∖ B ) , with the important special case
C ∖ ( C ∖ A ) = ( C ∩ A ) demonstrating that intersection can be expressed using only the relative complement operation.
( B ∖ A ) ∩ C = ( B ∩ C ) ∖ A = B ∩ ( C ∖ A ) . ( B ∖ A ) ∪ C = ( B ∪ C ) ∖ ( A ∖ C ) . A ∖ A = ∅ . ∅ ∖ A = ∅ . A ∖ ∅ = A . A ∖ U = ∅ . If A ⊂ B , then C ∖ A ⊃ C ∖ B . A ⊇ B ∖ C is equivalent to C ⊇ B ∖ A . A binary relation R is defined as a subset of a product of sets
X × Y . The complementary relation
R ¯ is the set complement of
R in X × Y . The complement of relation
R can be written R ¯ = ( X × Y ) ∖ R . Here, R is often viewed as a logical matrix with rows representing the elements of
X , and columns elements of
Y . The truth of a R b corresponds to 1 in row
a , column b . Producing the complementary relation to
R then corresponds to switching all 1s to 0s, and 0s to 1s for the logical matrix of the complement.
Together with composition of relations and converse relations, complementary relations and the algebra of sets are the elementary operations of the calculus of relations.
--- Cardinality --- In mathematics, cardinality is an inherent property of sets, roughly meaning the number of individual objects they contain, which may be infinite. The concept is understood through one-to-one correspondences between sets. That is, if their objects can be paired such that each object has a pair, and no object is paired more than once.
The basic concepts of cardinality go back as early as the 6th century BCE, and there are several close encounters with it throughout history, however, the results were generally dismissed as paradoxical. It is considered to have been first introduced formally to mathematics by Georg Cantor at the turn of the 20th century. Cantor's theory of cardinality was then formalized, popularized, and explored by many influential mathematicians of the time, and has since become a fundamental concept of mathematics.
Two sets are said to be equinumerous or have the same cardinality if there exists a one-to-one correspondence between them. Otherwise, one is said to be strictly larger or strictly smaller than the other. A set is countably infinite if it can be placed in one-to-one correspondence with the set of natural numbers
{ 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , ⋯ } . For example, the set of even numbers
{ 2 , 4 , 6 , . . } and the set of rational numbers are countable. Uncountable sets are those strictly larger than the set of natural numbers—for example, the set of all real numbers or the powerset of the set of natural numbers.
For finite sets, cardinality coincides with the natural number found by counting their elements. However, it is more often difficult to ascribe "sizes" to infinite sets. Thus, a system of cardinal numbers can be developed to extend the role of natural numbers in answering "how many". The cardinal number corresponding to a set
A is written as | A | between two vertical bars. Most commonly, the Aleph numbers
ℵ 0 , ℵ 1 , ℵ 2 , . . . ℵ ω , ℵ ω + 1 . . . are used, since it can be shown every infinite set has cardinality equivalent to some Aleph.
The set of natural numbers has cardinality
ℵ 0 . The question of whether the real numbers have cardinality
ℵ 1 is known as the continuum hypothesis, which has been shown to be unprovable in standard set theories such as Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory. Alternative set theories and additional axioms give rise to different properties and have often strange or unintuitive consequences. However, every theory of cardinality using standard logical foundations of mathematics admits Skolem's paradox, which roughly asserts that basic properties of cardinality are not absolute, but relative to the model in which the cardinality is measured.
Cardinality is an inherent property of sets which defines their size, roughly meaning the number of individual objects they contain. Fundamentally however, it is different from the concepts of number or counting as the cardinalities of two sets can be compared without referring to their number of elements, or defining number at all. For example, in the image above, a set of apples is compared to a set of oranges such that every fruit is used exactly once which shows these two sets have the same cardinality, even if one doesn't know how many of each there are. Thus, cardinality is measured by putting sets in one-to-one correspondence. If it is possible, the sets are said to have the same cardinality, and if not, one set is said to be strictly larger or strictly smaller than the other.
The basic concepts of cardinality are developed in terms of sets and functions, which are somewhat more abstract than their counterparts outside of mathematics. Informally, a set can be understood as any collection of objects, usually represented with curly braces. For example,
S = { 1 , 2 , 3 } specifies a set, called
S , which contains the numbers 1, 2, and 3. The symbol
∈ represents set membership, for example
1 ∈ S says "1 is a member of the set
S " which is true by the definition of
S above. Here S is finite, but that is not a requirement in general. The only requirement for a set is that it is well-defined. That is, for any object,
x , one can determine whether
x belongs to that set ( x ∈ S ) , or x does not belong to that set
( x ∉ S ) . One example of an infinite set is the set of all natural numbers
{ 1 , 2 , 3 , . . . } . A function, or correspondence, maps members of one set to the members of another, often represented with an arrow diagram. For example, the adjacent table depicts several functions which map sets of natural numbers to sets of letters. If a function does not map two members to the same place, it is called injective. If a function covers every member in the output set, it is called surjective. If a function is both injective and surjective, it is called bijective or a one-to-one correspondence. Functions are not limited to those one can draw an arrow diagram for, so long as the function is well-defined. That is, for each possible input, one can determine the output. For example, one may define a function from the natural numbers to the natural numbers by multiplying by two:
1 ↦ 2 , 2 ↦ 4 , 3 ↦ 6... n ↦ 2 n . . . The term cardinality originates from the post-classical Latin cardo ("to hinge"), which referred to something central or pivotal, both literally and metaphorically. This passed into medieval Latin and then into English, where cardinal came to describe things considered to be, in some sense, fundamental, such as, cardinal sins, cardinal directions, and (in linguistics) cardinal numbers. The last of which referred to numbers used for counting (e.g., one, two, three), as opposed to ordinal numbers, which express order (e.g., first, second, third), and nominal numbers used for labeling without meaning (e.g., jersey numbers and serial numbers).
In mathematics, the notion of cardinality was first introduced by German mathematician Georg Cantor in the late 19th century, who used the term Mächtigkeit, which may be translated as "magnitude" or "power", though Cantor credited the term to a work by Jakob Steiner on projective geometry. Around 1930, the terms cardinality and cardinal number were adopted from the grammatical sense, and later translations would use these terms.
An intuitive relationship between two sets having the "same size" is that their objects can be paired one-to-one. That is, if each object in one set can be assigned a dedicated "pair" in the other, and no object from either set left unpaired, it seems reasonable to say there are the same number of objects in each set. A one-to-one pairing between two sets defines a bijective function between them by mapping each object to its pair. Similarly, a bijection between two sets defines a pairing of their elements by pairing each object with the one it maps to. Therefore, these notions of "pairing" and "bijection" are, at least intuitively, equivalent. Thus, the following definition is given:
Two sets are said to have the same cardinality or be equinumerous if their members can be paired one-to-one. That is, if there exists a function between them which is bijective. This is often written as
A ∼ B , or A ≈ B . Alternatively, these sets may be said to be equivalent, similar, equipotent, or equipollent. For example, the set
E = { 0 , 2 , 4 , 6 , ... } of even numbers has the same cardinality as the set
N = { 0 , 1 , 2 , 3 , ... } of natural numbers, since the function
f ( n ) = 2 n is a bijection from ⁠
N ⁠ to ⁠ E ⁠. The property for finite sets that "the whole is greater than the part" is no longer true for infinite sets, and the existence of surjections or injections that don't work does not prove that there is no bijection. For example, the function ⁠
g ⁠ from ⁠ N ⁠ to ⁠ E ⁠, defined by multiplying by 4,
g ( n ) = 4 n , is injective, but not surjective (since 2, for instance, is not mapped to). Further, the function ⁠
h ⁠ from ⁠ N ⁠ to ⁠ E ⁠, defined by rounding down to the nearest even number,
h ( n ) = 2 floor ⁡ ( n / 2 ) (cf. floor function), is surjective, but not injective, (since 0 and 1 for instance both map to 0). Neither ⁠
g ⁠ nor ⁠ h ⁠ can challenge | E | = | N | , which was established by the existence of ⁠
f ⁠. A fundamental result necessary in developing a theory of cardinality is relating it to an equivalence relation. A binary relation is an equivalence relation if it satisfies the three basic properties of equality: reflexivity, symmetry, and transitivity.
Reflexivity: For any set
A , A ∼ A . Given any set A , there is a bijection from
A to itself by the identity function, therefore equinumerosity is reflexive.
Symmetry: If A ∼ B then B ∼ A . Given any sets A and B , such that there is a bijection
f from A to B , then there is an inverse function
f − 1 from B to A , which is also bijective, therefore equinumerosity is symmetric.
Transitivity: If A ∼ B and B ∼ C then A ∼ C . Given any sets A , B , and C such that there is a bijection
f from A to B , and g from B to C , then their composition
g ∘ f is a bijection from A to C , and so cardinality is transitive.
Since equinumerosity satisfies these three properties, it forms an equivalence relation. This means that cardinality, in some sense, partitions sets into equivalence classes, and one may assign a representative to denote this class. This motivates the notion of a cardinal number. Somewhat more formally, a relation must be a certain set of ordered pairs. Since there is no set of all sets in standard set theory, equinumerosity is not a relation in the usual sense, but a predicate, defined formally as:
A ∼ B ⟺ ∃ ( f : A → B ) ( ∀ b ∈ B ( ∃ ! a ∈ A ( f ( a ) = b ) ) A set A is not larger than a set
B if it can be mapped into
B without overlap. That is, the cardinality of
A is less than or equal to the cardinality of
B if there is an injective function from
A to B . This is written A ⪯ B , A ≲ B and eventually | A | ≤ | B | , and read as A is not greater than B , or A is dominated by B . If A ⪯ B , but there is no injection from
B to A , then A is said to be strictly smaller than
B , written without the underline as
A ≺ B or | A | < | B | . For example, if A has four elements and
B has five, then the following are true
A ⪯ A , A ⪯ B , and A ≺ B . The basic properties of an inequality are reflexivity (for any
a , a ≤ a ), transitivity (if a ≤ b and b ≤ c , then a ≤ c ) and antisymmetry (if
a ≤ b and b ≤ a , then a = b ) (See Inequality § Formal definitions). Cardinal inequality
( ⪯ ) as defined above is reflexive since the identity function is injective, and is transitive by function composition. Antisymmetry is established by the Schröder–Bernstein theorem.
The above shows that cardinal inequality is a partial order. A total order has the additional property that, for any
a and b , either a ≤ b or b ≤ a . This can be established by the well-ordering theorem. Every well-ordered set is isomorphic to a unique ordinal number, called the order type of the set. Then, by comparing their order types, one can show that
A ⪯ B or B ⪯ A . This result is equivalent to the axiom of choice.
A set is called countable if it is finite or has a bijection with the set of natural numbers
( N ) , in which case it is called countably infinite. The term denumerable is also sometimes used for countably infinite sets. For example, the set of all even natural numbers is countable, and therefore has the same cardinality as the whole set of natural numbers, even though it is a proper subset. Similarly, the set of square numbers is countable, which was considered paradoxical for hundreds of years before modern set theory (cf. § Pre-Cantorian set theory). However, several other examples have historically been considered surprising or initially unintuitive since the rise of set theory.
The rational numbers ( Q ) are those which can be expressed as the quotient or fraction ⁠
p q ⁠ of two integers. The rational numbers can be shown to be countable by considering the set of fractions as the set of all ordered pairs of integers, denoted
Z × Z , which can be visualized as the set of all integer points on a grid. Then, an intuitive function can be described by drawing a line in a repeating pattern, or spiral, which eventually goes through each point in the grid. For example, going through each diagonal on the grid for positive fractions, or through a lattice spiral for all integer pairs. These technically over cover the rationals, since, for example, the rational number
1 2 {\textstyle {\frac {1}{2}}}
gets mapped to by all the fractions
2 4 , 3 6 , 4 8 , … , {\textstyle {\frac {2}{4}},\,{\frac {3}{6}},\,{\frac {4}{8}},\,\dots ,}
as the grid method treats these all as distinct ordered pairs. So this function shows
| Q | ≤ | N | not | Q | = | N | . This can be corrected by "skipping over" these numbers in the grid, using the Schröder–Bernstein theorem, or by designing a function which does this naturally, for example using the Calkin–Wilf tree.
A number is called algebraic if it is a solution of some polynomial equation (with integer coefficients). For example, the square root of two
2 is a solution to x 2 − 2 = 0 , and the rational number
p / q is the solution to q x − p = 0. Conversely, a number which cannot be the root of any polynomial is called transcendental. Two examples include Euler's number (e) and pi (π). In general, proving a number is transcendental is considered to be very difficult, and only a few classes of transcendental numbers are known. However, it can be shown that the set of algebraic numbers is countable by ordering the polynomials lexicographically (for example, see Cantor's first set theory article § The proofs). Since the set of algebraic numbers is countable while the real numbers are uncountable (shown in the following section), the transcendental numbers must form the vast majority of real numbers, even though they are individually much harder to identify. That is to say, almost all real numbers are transcendental.
Hilbert's paradox of the Grand Hotel is a popular thought experiment devised by the German mathematician David Hilbert to illustrate a counterintuitive property of countably infinite sets, allowing them to have the same cardinality as a proper subset of themselves. The scenario begins by imagining a hotel with an infinite number of rooms, one for each natural number, all of which are occupied. But then a new guest walks in asking for a room. The hotel accommodates by moving the occupant of room 1 to room 2, the occupant of room 2 to room 3, room 3 to room 4, and in general, room n to room n+1. Then every guest still has a room, but room 1 is open for the new guest.
Then, the scenario continues by imagining an infinitely long bus of new guests seeking a room. The hotel accommodates by moving the person in room 1 to room 2, room 2 to room 4, and in general, room n to room 2n. Thus, all the even-numbered rooms are occupied, but all the odd-numbered rooms are vacant, leaving room for the infinite bus of new guests. The scenario continues further by assuming an infinite number of these infinite buses arrive at the hotel, and showing that the hotel is still able to accommodate. Finally, an infinite bus which has a seat for every real number arrives, and the hotel is no longer able to accommodate.
A set is called uncountable if it is not countable; that is, it is infinite and strictly larger than the set of natural numbers. The usual first example of this is the set of real numbers
( R ) , which can be understood as the set of all numbers on the number line. One method of proving that the reals are uncountable is called Cantor's diagonal argument, credited to Cantor for his 1891 proof, though his method differs from the more common presentation.
It begins by assuming, by contradiction, that there is some one-to-one mapping between the natural numbers and the set of real numbers between 0 and 1 (the interval
[ 0 , 1 ] ). Then, take the decimal representation of each real number, for example,
0.5772... with a leading zero followed by any sequence of digits. The number 1 is included in this set since 1 = 0.999... Considering these real numbers in a column, it is always possible to create a new number such that the first digit of the new number is different from that of the first number in the column, the second digit is different from the second number in the column, and so on. The new number must also have a unique decimal representation, that is, it cannot end in repeating nines or repeating zeros. For example, if the digit isn't 2, make the digit of the new number 2, and if it was 2, make it 3. Then, this new number will be different from each of the numbers in the list by at least one digit, and therefore must not be in the list. This shows that the real numbers cannot be put into a one-to-one correspondence with the naturals, and thus must be strictly larger.
Another classical example of an uncountable set, established using a related reasoning, is the power set of the natural numbers, denoted
P ( N ) . This is the set of all subsets of
N , including the empty set and
N itself. The method is much closer to Cantor's original diagonal argument. Again, assume by contradiction that there exists a one-to-one correspondence
f between N and P ( N ) , so that every subset of
N is assigned to some natural number. These subsets are then placed in a column, in the order defined by
f (see image). Now, one may define a subset
T of N which is not in the list by taking the negation of the "diagonal" of this column as follows:
If 1 ∈ f ( 1 ) , then 1 ∉ T , that is, if 1 is in the first subset of the list, then 1 is not in the subset
T . Further, if 2 ∉ f ( 2 ) , then 2 ∈ T , that is if the number 2 is not in the second subset of the column, then 2 is in the subset
T . Then in general, for each natural number
n , n ∈ T if and only if n ∉ f ( n ) , meaning n is put in the subset T only if the nth subset in the column does not contain the number
n . Then, for each natural number
n , T ≠ f ( n ) , meaning, T is not the nth subset in the list, for any number
n , and so it cannot appear anywhere in the list defined by
f . Since f was chosen arbitrarily, this shows that every function from
N to P ( N ) must be missing at least one element, therefore no such bijection can exist, and so
P ( N ) must be not be countable.
These two sets, R and P ( N ) can be shown to have the same cardinality (by, for example, assigning each subset to a decimal expansion) called the cardinality of the continuum.
Cantor's theorem generalizes the second theorem above, showing that every set is strictly smaller than its powerset. The proof roughly goes as follows: Given a set
A , assume by contradiction that there is a bijection
f from A to P ( A ) . Then, the subset T ⊆ A given by taking the negation of the "diagonal", formally,
T = { a ∈ A : a ∉ f ( a ) } , cannot be in the list. Therefore, every function is missing at least one element, and so
| A | < | P ( A ) | . Further, since P ( A ) is itself a set, the argument can be repeated to show
| A | < | P ( A ) | < | P ( P ( A ) ) | . Taking A = N , this shows that P ( P ( N ) ) is even larger than P ( N ) , which was already shown to be uncountable. Repeating this argument shows that there are infinitely many "sizes" of infinity.
In the above sections, "the cardinality of a set" was described relationally. In other words, one set could be compared to another, intuitively comparing their "size". Cardinal numbers are a means of measuring this "size" more explicitly. For finite sets, this is simply the natural number found by counting the elements. This number is called the cardinal number of that set, or simply the cardinality of that set. The cardinal number of a set
A is generally denoted by
| A | , with a vertical bar on each side, though it may also be denoted by
A , card ⁡ ( A ) , or # A . For infinite sets, "cardinal number" is somewhat more difficult to define formally. Cardinal numbers are not usually thought of in terms of their formal definition, but immaterially in terms of their arithmetic/algebraic properties. The assumption that there is some cardinal function
A ↦ | A | which satisfies A ∼ B ⟺ | A | = | B | , sometimes called the axiom of cardinality or Hume's principle, is sufficient for deriving most properties of cardinal numbers.
Commonly in mathematics, if a relation satisfies the properties of an equivalence relation, the objects used to materialize this relation are equivalence classes, which groups all the objects equivalent to one another. These called the Frege–Russell cardinal numbers. However, this would mean that cardinal numbers are too large to form sets (apart from the cardinal number
0 whose only element is the empty set), since, for example, the cardinal number
1 would be the set of all sets with one element, then
{ 1 } ∈ 1 , and would therefore contain itself, violating regularity. Thus, due to John von Neumann, it is more common to assign representatives of these classes.
Given a basic sense of natural numbers, a set is said to have cardinality
n if it can be put in one-to-one correspondence with the set
{ 1 , 2 , … , n } , analogous to counting its elements. For example, the set
S = { A , B , C , D } has a natural correspondence with the set
{ 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 } , and therefore is said to have cardinality 4. Other terminologies include "Its cardinality is 4" or "Its cardinal number is 4". In formal contexts, the natural numbers can be understood as some construction of objects satisfying the Peano axioms.
Showing that such a correspondence exists is not always trivial. Combinatorics is the area of mathematics primarily concerned with counting, both as a means and as an end to obtaining results, and certain properties of finite structures. The notion cardinality of finite sets is closely tied to many basic combinatorial principles, and provides a set-theoretic foundation to prove them. It can be shown by induction on the possible sizes of sets that finite cardinality corresponds uniquely with natural numbers (cf. Finite set § Uniqueness of cardinality). This is related—though not equivalent—to the pigeonhole principle.
The addition principle asserts that given disjoint sets
A and B , | A ∪ B | = | A | + | B | , intuitively meaning that the sum of the parts is equal to the whole. The multiplication principle asserts that given two sets
A and B , | A × B | = | A | ⋅ | B | , intuitively meaning that there are
| A | ⋅ | B | ways to pair objects from these sets. Both of these can be proven by a bijective proof, together with induction. The more general result is the inclusion–exclusion principle, which defines how to count the number of elements in overlapping sets.
Naturally, a set is defined to be finite if it is empty or can be put in correspondence with the set
{ 1 , 2 , … , n } , for some natural number
n . However, there exist other definitions of "finite" which don't rely on a definition of "number." For example, a set is called Dedekind-finite if it cannot be put in one-to-one correspondence with a proper subset of itself.
The aleph numbers are a sequence of cardinal numbers that represent the sizes of infinite sets, denoted with an aleph
ℵ , the first letter of the Hebrew alphabet. The first aleph number is
ℵ 0 , called "aleph-nought", "aleph-zero", or "aleph-null", which represents the cardinality of the set of all natural numbers:
ℵ 0 = | N | = | { 0 , 1 , 2 , 3 , ⋯ } | . Then, ℵ 1 represents the next largest cardinality, then
ℵ 2 , and so on. The most common way this is formalized in set theory is through Von Neumann ordinals, known as Von Neumann cardinal assignment.
Ordinal numbers generalize the notion of order to infinite sets. For example, 2 comes after 1, denoted
1 < 2 , and 3 comes after both, denoted
1 < 2 < 3. Then, one defines a new number,
ω , which comes after every natural number, denoted
1 < 2 < 3 < ⋯ < ω . Further ω < ω + 1 , and so on. More formally, these ordinal numbers can be defined as follows:
0 := { } , the empty set, 1 := { 0 } , 2 := { 0 , 1 } , 3 := { 0 , 1 , 2 } , and so on. Then one can define
m < n , if m ∈ n , for example, 2 ∈ { 0 , 1 , 2 } = 3 , therefore 2 < 3. Defining ω := { 0 , 1 , 2 , 3 , ⋯ } gives ω the desired property of being the smallest ordinal greater than all finite ordinal numbers. Further,
ω + 1 := { 1 , 2 , ⋯ , ω } , and so on. Since ω ∼ N by the natural correspondence, one may define
ℵ 0 as the set of all finite ordinals. That is,
ℵ 0 := ω . Then, ℵ 1 is the set of all countable ordinals (all ordinals
α with cardinality | α | ≤ ℵ 0 ), the first uncountable ordinal. Since a set cannot contain itself,
ℵ 1 must have a strictly larger cardinality:
ℵ 0 < ℵ 1 . Furthermore, ℵ 2 is the set of all ordinals with cardinality less than or equal to
ℵ 1 , and in general the successor cardinal
κ + is the set of all ordinals with cardinality up to
κ . Put another way for infinite cardinals,
κ + is the number of possible well-orderings on
κ up to order isomorphism. Proving that such a set always exists is known as Hartogs' theorem, wherein the smallest ordinal not less than or equal to than a set
κ is called the Hartogs number of
κ . Then, ℵ λ for a limit ordinal λ is the union of all lesser alephs.
The importance of ordinal numbers here is to generalize the notion of counting to infinite sets. When counting, one implicitly assigns an order to their set of objects, but no matter what order one assigns the final result of the count is always the same, which demonstrates the connection between cardinal and ordinal numbers. Further, by the well-ordering theorem, there cannot exist any set with cardinality between
ℵ 0 and ℵ 1 , and every infinite set has some cardinality corresponding uniquely to some aleph
ℵ α , for some ordinal α . This allows one to use a constructive definition of the cardinality function, by assigning each set to its equinumerous aleph.
Basic arithmetic can be done on cardinal numbers in a very natural way, by extending the theorems for finite combinatorial principles above. The intuitive principle that is
A and B are disjoint then addition of these sets is simply taking their union, written as
| A ∪ B | = | A | + | B | . Thus if A and B are infinite, cardinal addition is defined as
| A | + | B | := | A ⊔ B | where ⊔ denotes disjoint union. Similarly, the multiplication of two sets is intuitively the number of ways to pair their elements (as in the multiplication principle), therefore cardinal multiplication is defined as
| A | ⋅ | B | := | A × B | , where × denotes the Cartesian product. These definitions can be shown to satisfy the basic properties of standard arithmetic:
Associativity: | A | + | B ⊔ C | = | A ⊔ B | + | C | , and | A | ⋅ | B × C | = | A × B | ⋅ | C | Commutativity: | A | + | B | = | B | + | A | , and | A | ⋅ | B | = | B | ⋅ | A | Distributivity: | A | ⋅ | B ⊔ C | = | A × B | + | A × C | Cardinal exponentiation
| A | | B | is defined via set exponentiation, the set of all functions
f : B ↦ A , that is, | A | | B | := | A B | . For finite sets this can be shown to coincide with standard natural number exponentiation, but includes as a corollary that zero to the power of zero is one
( 0 0 = 1 ) since there is exactly one function from the empty set to itself: the empty function. A combinatorial argument can be used to show
2 | A | = | P ( A ) | , by considering the indicator function of each subset. In general, cardinal exponentiation is not as well-behaved as cardinal addition and multiplication. For example, even though it can be proven that the expression
2 ℵ 0 does indeed correspond to some aleph, it is unprovable from standard set theories which aleph it corresponds to.
The set of all cardinal numbers refers to a hypothetical set which contains all cardinal numbers. Such a set cannot exist, which has been considered paradoxical, and related to the Burali-Forti paradox. Using the definition of cardinal numbers as representatives of their cardinalities.  It begins by assuming there is some set
S := { X | X is a cardinal number } . Then, if there is some largest cardinal
κ ∈ S , then the powerset 2 κ is strictly greater, and thus not in
S . Conversely, if there is no largest element, then the union
⋃ S contains the elements of all elements of
S , and is therefore greater than or equal to each element. Since there is no largest element in
S , for any element x ∈ S , there is another element
y ∈ S such that | x | < | y | and | y | ≤ | ⋃ S | . Thus, for any x ∈ S , | x | < | ⋃ S | , and so | ⋃ S | ∉ S . Thus, the collection of all cardinal numbers is too large to form a set, and is a proper class.
The number line is a geometric construct of the intuitive notions of "space" and "distance" wherein each point corresponds to a distinct quantity or position along a continuous path. The terms "continuum" and "continuous" refer to the totality of this line, having some space (other points) between any two points on the line (dense and archimedian) and the absence of any gaps (completeness), This intuitive construct is formalized by the set of real numbers
( R ) which model the continuum as a complete, densely ordered, uncountable set.
The cardinality of the continuum, denoted by "
c " (a lowercase fraktur script "c"), remains invariant under various transformations and mappings, many considered surprising. For example, all intervals on the real line e.g.
[ 0 , 1 ] , and [ 0 , 2 ] , have the same cardinality as the entire set
R . First, f ( x ) = 2 x is a bijection from [ 0 , 1 ] to [ 0 , 2 ] . Then, the tangent function is a bijection from the interval
( − π 2 , π 2 ) {\textstyle \left({\frac {-\pi }{2}}\,,{\frac {\pi }{2}}\right)}
to the whole real line. A more surprising example is the Cantor set, which is defined as follows: take the interval
[ 0 , 1 ] and remove the middle third
( 1 3 , 2 3 ) {\textstyle \left({\frac {1}{3}},{\frac {2}{3}}\right)}
, then remove the middle third of each of the two remaining segments, and continue removing middle thirds (see image). The Cantor set is the set of points that survive this process. This set that remains is all of the points whose decimal expansion can be written in ternary without a 1. Reinterpreting these decimal expansions as binary (e.g. by replacing the 2s with 1s) gives a bijection between the Cantor set and the interval
[ 0 , 1 ] . Space-filling curves are continuous surjective maps from the unit interval
[ 0 , 1 ] onto the unit square on
R 2 , with classical examples such as the Peano curve and Hilbert curve. Although such maps are not injective, they are indeed surjective, and thus suffice to demonstrate cardinal equivalence. They can be reused at each dimension to show that
| R | = | R n | = c for any dimension n ≥ 1. The infinite cartesian product
R ∞ , can also be shown to have cardinality
c . This can be established by cardinal exponentiation:
| R ∞ | = c ℵ 0 = ( 2 ℵ 0 ) ℵ 0 = 2 ( ℵ 0 ⋅ ℵ 0 ) = 2 ℵ 0 = c = | R | .  Thus, the real numbers, all finite-dimensional real spaces, and the countable cartesian product share the same cardinality.
As shown in § Uncountable sets, the set of real numbers is strictly larger than the set of natural numbers. Specifically,
| R | = | P ( N ) | . The Continuum Hypothesis (CH) asserts that the real numbers have the next largest cardinality after the natural numbers, that is
| R | = ℵ 1 . As shown by Gödel and Cohen, the continuum hypothesis is independent of ZFC, a standard axiomatization of set theory; that is, it is impossible to prove the continuum hypothesis or its negation from ZFC—provided that ZFC is consistent, meaning it produces no contradictions. The Generalized Continuum Hypothesis (GCH) extends this to all infinite cardinals, stating that
2 ℵ α = ℵ α + 1 for every ordinal α . Research on CH and GCH continues independent of ZFC, especially in descriptive set theory and through the exploration of large cardinal axioms. Without GHC, the cardinality of
R cannot be written in terms of specific alephs. The Beth numbers provide a concise notation for powersets of the real numbers starting from
ℶ 0 = | N | , then ℶ 1 = 2 ℶ 0 = | R | , and ℶ 2 = | P ( R ) | = 2 ℶ 1 , and in general ℶ n + 1 = 2 ℶ n and ℶ λ = ⋃ α < λ ℶ α if λ is a limit ordinal. In model theory, a model corresponds to a specific interpretation of a formal language or theory. It consists of a domain (a set of objects) and an interpretation of the symbols in the language, such that the axioms of the theory are satisfied within this structure. In first-order logic, the Löwenheim–Skolem theorem states that if a theory has an infinite model, then it also has models of every other infinite cardinality. Applied to set theory, it asserts that Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory, which proves the existence of uncountable sets such as
P ( N ) , nevertheless has a countable model. Thus, Skolem's paradox was posed as follows: how can it be that there exists a domain of set theory which only contains countably many objects, but is capable of satisfying the statement "there exists a set with uncountably many elements"?
Skolem's paradox does not only apply to ZFC, but any first-order set theory, if it is consistent, has a model which is countable. A mathematical explanation of the paradox, showing that it is not a true contradiction in mathematics, was first given in 1922 by Thoralf Skolem. He explained that the countability or uncountability of a set is not absolute, but relative to the model in which the cardinality is measured. This is because, for example, if the set
X is countable in a model of set theory then there is a bijection
f : N ↦ X . But a submodel containing
X which excludes all such functions would thus contain no bijection between
X and N , and therefore X would be uncountable. In second-order and higher-order logics, the Löwenheim–Skolem theorem does not hold. This is due to the fact that second-order logic quantifies over all subsets of the domain. Skolem's work was harshly received by Ernst Zermelo, who argued against the limitations of first-order logic and Skolem's notion of "relativity", but the result quickly came to be accepted by the mathematical community.
Around the turn of the 20th century, set theory turned to an axiomatic approach to avoid rampant foundational issues related to its naive study (cf. § Axiomatic set theory). The most common axiomatic set theory used today is Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory (ZFC). In this system, the relevant axioms include: the Axiom of Infinity, stating roughly "there is an infinite set", specifically, a set with cardinality of the natural numbers
N ; the Axiom of power set, which says that, for any set
A , the powerset P ( A ) also exists; and the Axiom of Choice, explained below. ZFC has been criticized both for being too strong, and too weak. Similarly, there are many "natural extensions" of ZFC studied by set theorists. Thus, there exist many alternative systems of axioms each of which has implications to the standard theory of cardinality discussed above.
The Axiom of Choice (AC) is a fundamental principle in the foundations of mathematics which has seen much controversy in its history. Roughly, it states that given any collection of non-empty sets, it is possible to construct a new set by choosing one element from each set, even if the collection is infinite. In many cases, a set created by choosing elements can be made without invoking the axiom of choice. But it is not possible to do this in general, in which case, the axiom of choice must be invoked.
If the Axiom of Choice is assumed to be false in ZF, it has several implications:
Cardinal inequality ( ⪯ ) cannot be a total order on all sets. That is, given any two sets
A , B , it may be that neither
A ⪯ B nor B ⪯ A hold. Further, since Alephs can naturally be compared, there exist sets which do not correspond to any Aleph number.
There may exist sets which are Dedekind-finite, meaning they cannot be put in bijection with a proper subset of itself, but whose elements cannot be counted (put in bijection with
{ 1 , 2 , ⋯ , n } for any n). It is impossible to prove there exists a cardinal function
S ↦ | S | which satisfies the cardinal number axiom, and satisfies
| S | ∼ S for all S . Thus, some authors reserve
card ⁡ ( S ) for the cardinality of well-orderable sets. Still, the function can be defined using Scott's trick, which uses the Axiom of Regularity to assign each set
S to the least rank V α of the Von Neumann universe which contains a set equinumerous to
S . One may define the "infinite product" of cardinal numbers as the cardinality of the set of all sequences of their elements. Asserting that this set is always nonempty is equivalent to the axiom of choice. This is why Bertrand Russell called AC the Multiplicative axiom.
Although the Generalized Continuum Hypothesis (GCH) is independent of ZFC, it can be shown that ZF+GCH is sufficient to prove AC. Thus, if AC is false, it follows that the GCH does not hold.
Some set theories allow for proper classes, which are, roughly, collections "too large" to form sets. For example, the Universe of all sets, the class of all cardinal numbers, or the class of all ordinal numbers. Such set theories include Von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel set theory, and Morse–Kelley set theory. In such set theories, some authors find this definition more elegant than assigning representatives, as it more accurately describes the concept by "definition by abstraction".
Proper classes can, in a sense, be assigned cardinalities. Cantor originally called the cardinality of a proper class "Absolute infinite", denoted with tav ת‎ (the last letter of the Hebrew alphabet), and associated the concept with God. The first to distinguish between sets and classes was John von Neumann, who formalized the notion of "too large to form sets". More accurately, he defined a class to be a proper class if and only if it was equinumerous with the whole Universe of sets (cf. Axiom of limitation of size). Thus, all proper classes have the same "size". The axiom has several implications, mostly relating to the limitation of size principles of early set theory. It implies the axiom of specification, the axiom of replacement, the axiom of union, and the axiom of global choice.
Large cardinal axioms assert the existence of cardinal numbers which, as the name suggests, are very large—so large that they cannot be proven to exist within ZFC. For example, an inaccessible cardinal is, roughly, a cardinal that cannot be approached from below using basic set-theoretic operations such as unions, limits, and powersets (more formally, a regular, limit cardinal greater than
ℵ 0 ). Large cardinals are understood in terms of the Von Neumann hierarchy, denoted
V α (for some ordinal α ), which can be roughly understood as the sets that can be obtained from the empty set, followed by recursively applying the powerset
α times. Specifically, V 0 = ∅ , V α + 1 = P ( V α ) and V λ = ⋃ α < λ V α for a limit ordinal λ . There exist many known properties defining large cardinals, which come roughly in a linear hierarchy, in terms of consistency strength. As an analogy, in ZFC without the Axiom of Infinity can only prove the existence of finite sets. Therefore
V ω ( = P ( ∅ ) ∪ P ( P ( ∅ ) ) ∪ ⋯ ) , whose existence is provable in usual ZFC, can serve as a model of ZFC–Infinity, and thus if ZFC is consistent, ZFC–Infinity is consistent. Analogously, ZFC+"There exists an inaccessible cardinal" implies the consistency of ZFC, since if
κ is inaccessible, V κ can serve as a model of ZFC (cf. Grothendieck universe). Stronger and stronger large cardinal axioms assert the existence of larger and larger cardinals, each of which proves the consistency—or inconsistency—of the weaker systems.
Large cardinals are at the forefront of set-theoretic research for both practical and philosophical reasons. In a practical sense, it is often the case that unproven or unprovable conjectures can be settled by sufficiently strong large cardinal axioms. For example, the existence of a measurable cardinal is inconsistent with Gödel's constructibility axiom. Similarly, the existence of a Reinhardt cardinal is inconsistent with the axiom of choice, which makes it a much more controversial large cardinal axiom.
In a philosophical sense, according to a platonic view among set-theorists such as W. Hugh Woodin, these axioms simply extend the system to include sets that are "supposed" to be considered. That is, there is some fundamental universe of sets, which these axioms grant further access to. For this reason, large cardinal axioms are generally given preference compared to other possible axioms of set theory. This view is controversial among a competing philosophy, sometimes called pluralism, which posits that set theory should be understood as a multiverse of set theories, but no "absolute" or "true" model.
The axiom of constructability was the axiom introduced by Kurt Gödel to prove the relative consistency of the axiom of choice and generalized continuum hypothesis. It states that all sets are "constructable" (cf. Constructible universe § What L is). It has several consequences, naturally, including AC and GCH, but resolves several other important questions in set theory. The axiom, however, is not well-accepted by set-theorists, most believing it to be "too restrictive". In part it is because the axiom is contradicted by sufficiently strong large cardinal axioms.
The Axiom of Determinacy (AD) asserts that certain kinds of mathematical games on the natural numbers are determined; that is, one player will always have a guaranteed winning strategy. The first serious study of the consequences of AD started during the 1960s in descriptive set theory—which, roughly, studies the definable sets of the real numbers—after it was noticed that it leads to very nice regulatory properties of the real numbers. Specifically, it implies the perfect set property, the property of Baire, and that all sets of real numbers are Lebesgue measurable. However, it was shown that this axiom is inconsistent with AC (cf. Axiom of determinacy § Incompatibility with the axiom of choice), and thus was never taken as a fundamental axiom of set theory. However, its relationship to and consistency with large cardinals is still of heavy interest among set theorists such as Donald A. Martin, John R. Steel, and W. Hugh Woodin.
Replacing the Axiom of Choice with the Axiom of Determinacy has several implications:
The Banach–Tarski paradox is a paradox arising from AC which allows one to disassemble a ball into finitely many pieces, and re-arrange them into two balls identical to the original. This, and related paradoxes, become impossible under AD.
It is possible to partition the set of real numbers in such a way that there are strictly more nonempty sets of real numbers than there are real numbers. That is, if
P denotes a general partition of
R , there is a partition such that
| P | > | R | . From the 6th century BCE, the writings of Greek philosophers, such as Anaximander, show hints of comparing infinite sets or shapes, however, it was generally viewed as paradoxical and imperfect (cf. Zeno's paradoxes). Aristotle distinguished between the notions of actual infinity and potential infinity, arguing that Greek mathematicians understood the difference, and that they "do not need the [actual] infinite and do not use it." The Greek notion of number (αριθμός, arithmos) was used exclusively for a definite number of definite objects (i.e. finite numbers). This would be codified in Euclid's Elements, where the fifth common notion states "The whole is greater than the part", often called the Euclidean principle. This principle would be the dominating philosophy in mathematics until the 19th century.
Around the 4th century BCE, Jaina mathematics would be the first to discuss different sizes of infinity. They defined three major classes of number: enumerable (finite numbers), unenumerable (asamkhyata, roughly, countably infinite), and infinite (ananta). Then they had five classes of infinite numbers: infinite in one direction, infinite in both directions, infinite in area, infinite everywhere, and infinite perpetually.
One of the earliest explicit uses of a one-to-one correspondence is recorded in Aristotle's Mechanics (c. 350 BCE), known as Aristotle's wheel paradox. The paradox can be briefly described as follows: A wheel is depicted as two concentric circles. The larger, outer circle is tangent to a horizontal line (e.g. a road that it rolls on), while the smaller, inner circle is rigidly affixed to the larger.  Assuming the larger circle rolls along the line without slipping (or skidding) for one full revolution, the distances moved by both circles are the same: the circumference of the larger circle. Further, the lines traced by the bottom-most point of each is the same length. Since the smaller wheel does not skip any points, and no point on the smaller wheel is used more than once, there is a one-to-one correspondence between the two circles.
Galileo Galilei presented what was later coined Galileo's paradox in his book Two New Sciences (1638), where he presents a seeming paradox in infinite sequences of numbers. It goes roughly as follows: for each perfect square
( n 2 ) 1, 4, 9, 16, and so on, there is a unique square root
( n 2 = n ) {\textstyle ({\sqrt {n^{2}}}=n)}
1, 2, 3, 4, and so on. Therefore, there are as many perfect squares as there are square roots. However, every number is a square root, since it can be squared, but not every number is a perfect square. Moreover, the proportion of perfect squares as one passes larger values diminishes, and is eventually smaller than any given fraction. Galileo denied that this was fundamentally contradictory, however he concluded that this meant we could not compare the sizes of infinite sets, missing the opportunity to discover cardinality.
In A Treatise of Human Nature (1739), David Hume is quoted for saying "When two numbers are so combined, as that the one has always a unit answering to every unit of the other, we pronounce them equal", now called Hume's principle, which was used extensively by Gottlob Frege later during the rise of set theory.
Bernard Bolzano's Paradoxes of the Infinite (Paradoxien des Unendlichen, 1851) is often considered the first systematic attempt to introduce the concept of sets into mathematical analysis. In this work, Bolzano defended the notion of actual infinity, presented an early formulation of what would later be recognized as one-to-one correspondence between infinite sets. He discussed examples such as the pairing between the intervals
[ 0 , 5 ] and [ 0 , 12 ] by the relation 5 y = 12 x , and revisited Galileo's paradox. However, he too resisted saying that these sets were, in that sense, the same size. While Paradoxes of the Infinite anticipated several ideas central to later set theory, the work had little influence on contemporary mathematics, in part due to its posthumous publication and limited circulation.
The concept of cardinality emerged nearly fully formed in the work of Georg Cantor during the 1870s and 1880s, in the context of mathematical analysis. In a series of papers beginning with On a Property of the Collection of All Real Algebraic Numbers (1874), Cantor introduced the idea of comparing the sizes of infinite sets, through the notion of one-to-one correspondence. He showed that the set of real numbers was, in this sense, strictly larger than the set of natural numbers using a nested intervals argument. This result was later refined into the more widely known diagonal argument of 1891, published in Über eine elementare Frage der Mannigfaltigkeitslehre, where he also proved the more general result (now called Cantor's Theorem) that the power set of any set is strictly larger than the set itself.
Cantor introduced the notion cardinal numbers together with ordinal numbers, which he viewed as abstractions of sets. For a given set
M {\textstyle M} , he wrote M ¯ {\textstyle {\overline {M}}}
to mean the abstraction of that set from its elements, while maintaining their order, and cardinal numbers were a double abstraction, written
M {\textstyle M} . Specifically, his definition was "the general concept which, with the aid of our intelligence, results from a set when we abstract from the nature of its various elements and from the order of their being given." This definition was considered to be imprecise, unclear, and purely psychological, and it would be some time before the concept was put on more rigorous footing. He also introduced the Aleph sequence for infinite cardinal numbers. These notations appeared in correspondence and were formalized in his later writings, particularly the series Beiträge zur Begründung der transfiniten Mengenlehre (1895–1897). In these works, Cantor developed an arithmetic of cardinal numbers, defining addition, multiplication, and exponentiation of cardinal numbers. This led to the formulation of the Continuum Hypothesis: whether
2 ℵ 0 = ℵ 1 . Cantor was unable to resolve CH and left it as an open problem.
Parallel to Cantor’s development, Richard Dedekind independently formulated many advanced theorems of set theory, and helped establish set-theoretic foundations of algebra and arithmetic. Dedekind's The Nature and Meaning of Numbers (1888) emphasized structural properties over extensional definitions, and supported the bijective formulation of size and number. Dedekind was in correspondence with Cantor during the development of set theory; he supplied Cantor with a proof of the countability of the algebraic numbers, and gave feedback and modifications on Cantor's proofs before publishing.
After Cantor's 1883 proof that all finite-dimensional spaces
( R n ) have the same cardinality, in 1890, Giuseppe Peano introduced the Peano curve, which was a more visual proof that the unit interval
[ 0 , 1 ] has the same cardinality as the unit square on
R 2 . This created a new area of mathematical analysis studying what is now called space-filling curves.
German logician Gottlob Frege attempted to ground the concepts of number and arithmetic in logic using Cantor's theory of cardinality and Hume's principle in Die Grundlagen der Arithmetik (1884) and the subsequent Grundgesetze der Arithmetik (1893, 1903). Frege defined cardinal numbers as equivalence classes of sets under equinumerosity. However, Frege's approach to set theory was later shown to be flawed. His approach was eventually reformalized by Bertrand Russell and Alfred Whitehead in Principia Mathematica (1910–1913, vol. II) using a theory of types. Though Russell initially had difficulties understanding Cantor's and Frege’s intuitions of cardinality. This definition of cardinal numbers is now referred to as the Frege–Russell definition. This definition was eventually superseded by the convention established by John von Neumann in 1928 which uses representatives to define cardinal numbers.
At the Paris conference of the International Congress of Mathematicians in 1900, David Hilbert, one of the most influential mathematicians of the time, gave a speech wherein he presented ten unsolved problems (of a total of 23, later published, now called Hilbert's problems). Of these, he placed "Cantor's problem" (now called the Continuum Hypothesis) as the first on the list. This list of problems would prove to be very influential in 20th century mathematics, and attracted a lot of attention from other mathematicians toward Cantor's theory of cardinality.
In 1908, Ernst Zermelo proposed the first axiomatization of set theory, now called Zermelo set theory, primarily to support his earlier (1904) proof of the Well-ordering theorem, which showed that all cardinal numbers could be represented as Alephs, though the proof required a controversial principle now known as the Axiom of Choice (AC). Zermelo's system would later be extended by Abraham Fraenkel and Thoralf Skolem in the 1920s to create the standard foundation of set theory, called Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory (ZFC, "C" for the Axiom of Choice). ZFC provided a rigorous foundation through which infinite cardinals could be systematically studied while avoiding the paradoxes of naive set theory.
Ignoring possible foundational issues, during the early 1900s, Felix Hausdorff would begin studying "exorbitant numbers": roughly, very large cardinal numbers, or what are now called inaccessible cardinals. This work would be continued and popularized by several other influential set theorists such as Paul Mahlo—who introduced Mahlo cardinals—as well as Wacław Sierpiński, and Alfred Tarski. Their work would eventually be known collectively as the study of large cardinals.
In 1940, Kurt Gödel showed that the Continuum Hypothesis (CH) cannot be disproved from the axioms of ZFC by showing that both CH and AC hold in his constructible universe: an inner model of ZFC. The existence of a model of ZFC in which additional axioms hold shows that the additional axioms are (relatively) consistent with ZFC. In 1963, Paul Cohen showed that CH cannot be proven from the ZFC axioms, which showed that CH was independent from ZFC. To prove his result, Cohen developed the method of forcing, which has become a standard tool in set theory. Cohen was awarded the Fields Medal in 1966 for his proof.

--- Countable set ---
In mathematics, a set is countable if either it is finite or it can be made in one to one correspondence with the set of natural numbers. Equivalently, a set is countable if there exists an injective function from it into the natural numbers; this means that each element in the set may be associated to a unique natural number, or that the elements of the set can be counted one at a time, although the counting may never finish due to an infinite number of elements.
In more technical terms, assuming the axiom of countable choice, a set is countable if its cardinality (the number of elements of the set) is not greater than that of the natural numbers. A countable set that is not finite is said to be countably infinite.
The concept is attributed to Georg Cantor, who proved the existence of uncountable sets, that is, sets that are not countable; for example the set of the real numbers.
Although the terms "countable" and "countably infinite" as defined here are quite common, the terminology is not universal. An alternative style uses countable to mean what is here called countably infinite, and at most countable to mean what is here called countable.
The terms enumerable and denumerable may also be used, e.g. referring to countable and countably infinite respectively, definitions vary and care is needed respecting the difference with recursively enumerable.
A set S is countable if: Its cardinality | S | is less than or equal to
ℵ 0 (aleph-null), the cardinality of the set of natural numbers
N . There exists an injective function from
S to N . S is empty or there exists a surjective function from
N to S . There exists a bijective mapping between
S and a subset of N . S is either finite ( | S | < ℵ 0 ) or countably infinite.
All of these definitions are equivalent.
A set S is countably infinite if:
Its cardinality | S | is exactly ℵ 0 . There is an injective and surjective (and therefore bijective) mapping between
S and N . S has a one-to-one correspondence with
N . The elements of S can be arranged in an infinite sequence
a 0 , a 1 , a 2 , … , where a i is distinct from a j for i ≠ j and every element of S is listed. A set is uncountable if it is not countable, i.e. its cardinality is greater than
ℵ 0 . In 1874, in his first set theory article, Cantor proved that the set of real numbers is uncountable, thus showing that not all infinite sets are countable. In 1878, he used one-to-one correspondences to define and compare cardinalities. In 1883, he extended the natural numbers with his infinite ordinals, and used sets of ordinals to produce an infinity of sets having different infinite cardinalities.
A set is a collection of elements, and may be described in many ways. One way is simply to list all of its elements; for example, the set consisting of the integers 3, 4, and 5 may be denoted
{ 3 , 4 , 5 } , called roster form. This is only effective for small sets, however; for larger sets, this would be time-consuming and error-prone. Instead of listing every single element, sometimes an ellipsis ("...") is used to represent many elements between the starting element and the end element in a set, if the writer believes that the reader can easily guess what ... represents; for example,
{ 1 , 2 , 3 , … , 100 } presumably denotes the set of integers from 1 to 100. Even in this case, however, it is still possible to list all the elements, because the number of elements in the set is finite. If we number the elements of the set 1, 2, and so on, up to
n , this gives us the usual definition of "sets of size
n ". Some sets are infinite; these sets have more than
n elements where n is any integer that can be specified. (No matter how large the specified integer
n is, such as n = 10 1000 , infinite sets have more than
n elements.) For example, the set of natural numbers, denotable by
{ 0 , 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , … } , has infinitely many elements, and we cannot use any natural number to give its size. It might seem natural to divide the sets into different classes: put all the sets containing one element together; all the sets containing two elements together; ...; finally, put together all infinite sets and consider them as having the same size. This view works well for countably infinite sets and was the prevailing assumption before Georg Cantor's work. For example, there are infinitely many odd integers, infinitely many even integers, and also infinitely many integers overall. We can consider all these sets to have the same "size" because we can arrange things such that, for every integer, there is a distinct even integer:
… − 2 → − 4 , − 1 → − 2 , 0 → 0 , 1 → 2 , 2 → 4 ⋯ or, more generally, n → 2 n (see picture). What we have done here is arrange the integers and the even integers into a one-to-one correspondence (or bijection), which is a function that maps between two sets such that each element of each set corresponds to a single element in the other set. This mathematical notion of "size", cardinality, is that two sets are of the same size if and only if there is a bijection between them. We call all sets that are in one-to-one correspondence with the integers countably infinite and say they have cardinality
ℵ 0 . Georg Cantor showed that not all infinite sets are countably infinite. For example, the real numbers cannot be put into one-to-one correspondence with the natural numbers (non-negative integers). The set of real numbers has a greater cardinality than the set of natural numbers and is said to be uncountable.
By definition, a set S is countable if there exists a bijection between
S and a subset of the natural numbers
N = { 0 , 1 , 2 , … } . For example, define the correspondence
a ↔ 1 , b ↔ 2 , c ↔ 3 Since every element of
S = { a , b , c } is paired with precisely one element of
{ 1 , 2 , 3 } , and vice versa, this defines a bijection, and shows that
S is countable. Similarly we can show all finite sets to be countable.
As for the case of infinite sets, a set
S is countably infinite if there is a bijection between
S and all of N . As examples, consider the sets
A = { 1 , 2 , 3 , … } , the set of positive integers, and
B = { 0 , 2 , 4 , 6 , … } , the set of even integers. We can show these sets are countably infinite by exhibiting a bijection to the natural numbers. This can be achieved using the assignments
n ↔ n + 1 and n ↔ 2 n , so that 0 ↔ 1 , 1 ↔ 2 , 2 ↔ 3 , 3 ↔ 4 , 4 ↔ 5 , … 0 ↔ 0 , 1 ↔ 2 , 2 ↔ 4 , 3 ↔ 6 , 4 ↔ 8 , … Every countably infinite set is countable, and every infinite countable set is countably infinite. Furthermore, any subset of the natural numbers is countable, and more generally:
The set of all ordered pairs of natural numbers (the Cartesian product of two sets of natural numbers,
N × N ) is countably infinite, as can be seen by following a path like the one in the picture:  The resulting mapping proceeds as follows:
0 ↔ ( 0 , 0 ) , 1 ↔ ( 1 , 0 ) , 2 ↔ ( 0 , 1 ) , 3 ↔ ( 2 , 0 ) , 4 ↔ ( 1 , 1 ) , 5 ↔ ( 0 , 2 ) , 6 ↔ ( 3 , 0 ) , … This mapping covers all such ordered pairs.
This form of triangular mapping recursively generalizes to
n -tuples of natural numbers, i.e.,
( a 1 , a 2 , a 3 , … , a n ) where a i and n are natural numbers, by repeatedly mapping the first two elements of an
n -tuple to a natural number. For example,
( 0 , 2 , 3 ) can be written as ( ( 0 , 2 ) , 3 ) . Then ( 0 , 2 ) maps to 5 so ( ( 0 , 2 ) , 3 ) maps to ( 5 , 3 ) , then ( 5 , 3 ) maps to 39. Since a different 2-tuple, that is a pair such as
( a , b ) , maps to a different natural number, a difference between two n-tuples by a single element is enough to ensure the n-tuples being mapped to different natural numbers. So, an injection from the set of
n -tuples to the set of natural numbers
N is proved. For the set of
n -tuples made by the Cartesian product of finitely many different sets, each element in each tuple has the correspondence to a natural number, so every tuple can be written in natural numbers then the same logic is applied to prove the theorem.
The set of all integers
Z and the set of all rational numbers
Q may intuitively seem much bigger than
N . But looks can be deceiving. If a pair is treated as the numerator and denominator of a vulgar fraction (a fraction in the form of
a / b where a and b ≠ 0 are integers), then for every positive fraction, we can come up with a distinct natural number corresponding to it. This representation also includes the natural numbers, since every natural number
n is also a fraction n / 1 . So we can conclude that there are exactly as many positive rational numbers as there are positive integers. This is also true for all rational numbers, as can be seen below.
In a similar manner, the set of algebraic numbers is countable.
Sometimes more than one mapping is useful: if a set
A to be shown as countable is one-to-one mapped (injection) to another set
B , then A is proved as countable if
B is one-to-one mapped to the set of natural numbers. For example, the set of positive rational numbers can easily be one-to-one mapped to the set of natural number pairs (2-tuples) because
p / q maps to ( p , q ) . Since the set of natural number pairs is one-to-one mapped (actually one-to-one correspondence or bijection) to the set of natural numbers as shown above, the positive rational number set is proved as countable.
With the foresight of knowing that there are uncountable sets, we can wonder whether or not this last result can be pushed any further. The answer is "yes" and "no", we can extend it, but we need to assume a new axiom to do so.
For example, given countable sets
a , b , c , … , we first assign each element of each set a tuple, then we assign each tuple an index using a variant of the triangular enumeration we saw above:
Index Tuple Element 0 ( 0 , 0 ) a 0 1 ( 0 , 1 ) a 1 2 ( 1 , 0 ) b 0 3 ( 0 , 2 ) a 2 4 ( 1 , 1 ) b 1 5 ( 2 , 0 ) c 0 6 ( 0 , 3 ) a 3 7 ( 1 , 2 ) b 2 8 ( 2 , 1 ) c 1 9 ( 3 , 0 ) d 0 10 ( 0 , 4 ) a 4 ⋮ We need the axiom of countable choice to index all the sets
a , b , c , … simultaneously. This set is the union of the length-1 sequences, the length-2 sequences, the length-3 sequences, and so on, each of which is a countable set (finite Cartesian product). Thus the set is a countable union of countable sets, which is countable by the previous theorem.
The elements of any finite subset can be ordered into a finite sequence. There are only countably many finite sequences, so also there are only countably many finite subsets.
These follow from the definitions of countable set as injective / surjective functions.
Cantor's theorem asserts that if
A is a set and P ( A ) is its power set, i.e. the set of all subsets of
A , then there is no surjective function from
A to P ( A ) . A proof is given in the article Cantor's theorem. As an immediate consequence of this and the Basic Theorem above we have:
For an elaboration of this result see Cantor's diagonal argument.
The set of real numbers is uncountable, and so is the set of all infinite sequences of natural numbers.
If there is a set that is a standard model (see inner model) of ZFC set theory, then there is a minimal standard model (see Constructible universe). The Löwenheim–Skolem theorem can be used to show that this minimal model is countable. The fact that the notion of "uncountability" makes sense even in this model, and in particular that this model M contains elements that are:
subsets of M, hence countable,
but uncountable from the point of view of M,
was seen as paradoxical in the early days of set theory; see Skolem's paradox for more.
The minimal standard model includes all the algebraic numbers and all effectively computable transcendental numbers, as well as many other kinds of numbers.
Countable sets can be totally ordered in various ways, for example:
Well-orders (see also ordinal number):
The usual order of natural numbers (0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, ...)
The integers in the order (0, 1, 2, 3, ...; −1, −2, −3, ...)
Other (not well orders):
The usual order of integers (..., −3, −2, −1, 0, 1, 2, 3, ...)
The usual order of rational numbers (Cannot be explicitly written as an ordered list!)
In both examples of well orders here, any subset has a least element; and in both examples of non-well orders, some subsets do not have a least element.
This is the key definition that determines whether a total order is also a well order.

--- Infinite set --- In set theory, an infinite set is a set that is not a finite set. Infinite sets may be countable or uncountable.
The set of natural numbers (whose existence is postulated by the axiom of infinity) is infinite. It is the only set that is directly required by the axioms to be infinite. The existence of any other infinite set can be proved in Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory (ZFC), but only by showing that it follows from the existence of the natural numbers.
A set is infinite if and only if for every natural number, the set has a subset whose cardinality is that natural number.
If the axiom of choice holds, then a set is infinite if and only if it includes a countable infinite subset.
If a set of sets is infinite or contains an infinite element, then its union is infinite. The power set of an infinite set is infinite. Any superset of an infinite set is infinite. If an infinite set is partitioned into finitely many subsets, then at least one of them must be infinite. Any set which can be mapped onto an infinite set is infinite. The Cartesian product of an infinite set and a nonempty set is infinite. The Cartesian product of an infinite number of sets, each containing at least two elements, is either empty or infinite; if the axiom of choice holds, then it is infinite.
If an infinite set is a well-ordered set, then it must have a nonempty, nontrivial subset that has no greatest element.
In ZF, a set is infinite if and only if the power set of its power set is a Dedekind-infinite set, having a proper subset equinumerous to itself. If the axiom of choice is also true, then infinite sets are precisely the Dedekind-infinite sets.
If an infinite set is a well-orderable set, then it has many well-orderings which are non-isomorphic.
Important ideas discussed by David Burton in his book The History of Mathematics: An Introduction include how to define "elements" or parts of a set, how to define unique elements in the set, and how to prove infinity. Burton also discusses proofs for different types of infinity, including countable and uncountable sets.  Topics used when comparing infinite and finite sets include ordered sets, cardinality, equivalency, coordinate planes, universal sets, mapping, subsets, continuity, and transcendence.  Cantor's set ideas were influenced by trigonometry and irrational numbers. Other key ideas in infinite set theory mentioned by Burton, Paula, Narli and Rodger include real numbers such as π, integers, and Euler's number.
Both Burton and Rogers use finite sets to start to explain infinite sets using proof concepts such as mapping, proof by induction, or proof by contradiction. Mathematical trees can also be used to understand infinite sets. Burton also discusses proofs of infinite sets including ideas such as unions and subsets.
In Chapter 12 of The History of Mathematics: An Introduction, Burton emphasizes how mathematicians such as Zermelo, Dedekind, Galileo, Kronecker, Cantor, and Bolzano investigated and influenced infinite set theory. Many of these mathematicians either debated infinity or otherwise added to the ideas of infinite sets. Potential historical influences, such as how Prussia's history in the 1800s, resulted in an increase in scholarly mathematical knowledge, including Cantor's theory of infinite sets.
One potential application of infinite set theory is in genetics and biology.
The set of all integers, {..., −1, 0, 1, 2, ...} is a countably infinite set. The set of all even integers is also a countably infinite set, even if it is a proper subset of the integers.
The set of all rational numbers is a countably infinite set as there is a bijection to the set of integers.
The set of all real numbers is an uncountably infinite set. The set of all irrational numbers is also an uncountably infinite set.
The set of all subsets of the integers is uncountably infinite.
Aleph number Cardinal number Ordinal number A Crash Course in the Mathematics Of Infinite Sets

--- Axiom of choice ---
In mathematics, the axiom of choice, abbreviated AC or AoC, is an axiom of set theory. Informally put, the axiom of choice says that given any collection of non-empty sets, it is possible to construct a new set by choosing one element from each set, even if the collection is infinite. Formally, it states that for every set
I and every I -indexed family ( S i ) i ∈ I of nonempty sets, there exists an
I -indexed set ( x i ) i ∈ I of elements of ∪ i ∈ I S i such that x i ∈ S i for every i ∈ I . The axiom of choice was formulated in 1904 by Ernst Zermelo in order to formalize his proof of the well-ordering theorem.
The axiom of choice is equivalent to the statement that every partition has a transversal.
In many cases, a set created by choosing elements can be made without invoking the axiom of choice, particularly if the number of sets from which to choose the elements is finite (in which induction can be applied), or if a canonical rule on how to choose the elements is available — some distinguishing property that happens to hold for exactly one element in each set. An illustrative example is sets picked from the natural numbers. From such sets, one may always select the smallest number, e.g. given the sets {{4, 5, 6}, {10, 12}, {1, 400, 617, 8000}}, the set containing each smallest element is {4, 10, 1}. In this case, "select the smallest number" is a choice function. Even if infinitely many sets are collected from the natural numbers, it will always be possible to form a choice function from choosing the smallest element from each set to produce a set; the axiom of choice is not needed here. On the other hand, for the collection of all non-empty subsets of the real numbers, there is no known canonical rule by which one can choose one element from each of these subsets. In that case, the axiom of choice must be invoked to construct the desired choice function.
Bertrand Russell coined an analogy: for any (even infinite) collection of unordered pairs of shoes, one can pick out the left shoe from each pair to obtain an appropriate collection (i.e. set) of shoes; this makes it possible to define a choice function without using the axiom of choice. However, for an infinite collection of unordered pairs of socks (assumed to have no distinguishing features such as being a left sock rather than a right sock), there is no natural (i.e., canonical) way of choosing one sock from each pair, so one must appeal to the axiom of choice to construct the desired choice function.
Although originally controversial, the axiom of choice is now used without reservation by most mathematicians, and is included in the standard form of axiomatic set theory, Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory with the axiom of choice (ZFC). One motivation for this is that a number of generally accepted mathematical results, such as Tychonoff's theorem, require the axiom of choice for their proofs. Contemporary set theorists also study axioms that are not compatible with the axiom of choice, such as the axiom of determinacy. While some varieties of constructive mathematics avoid the axiom of choice, others embrace it.
A choice function (also called selector or selection) is a function
f , defined on a collection
X of nonempty sets, such that for every set
A in X , f ( A ) is an element of A . With this concept, the axiom can be stated:
Formally, this may be expressed as follows:
∀ X [ ∅ ∈ X ∨ ∃ f [ d o m f = X ∧ ∀ A ∈ X [ f ( A ) ∈ A ] ] ] . Each choice function on a family
X of nonempty sets is an element of the Cartesian product of the sets in
X , and vice versa. Therefore an equivalent form of the axiom of choice is:
The Cartesian product of any collection X of nonempty sets is nonempty.
This form implies a more general form where the Cartesian product is of a general indexed family of sets (which may contain duplicates), since one can always select the same element from duplicate factors.
In this article and other discussions of the Axiom of Choice the following abbreviations are common:
AC – the Axiom of Choice. More rarely, AoC is used.
ZF – Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory omitting the Axiom of Choice.
ZFC – Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory, extended to include the Axiom of Choice.
There are many other equivalent statements of the axiom of choice. These are equivalent in the sense that, in the presence of other basic axioms of set theory, they imply the axiom of choice and are implied by it.
One variation avoids the use of choice functions by, in effect, replacing each choice function with its range:
Given any set X , if the empty set is not an element of
X and the elements of X are pairwise disjoint, then there exists a set
C such that its intersection with any of the elements of
X contains exactly one element.
This can be formalized in first-order logic as:
∀ x ( ∃ e ( e ∈ x ∧ ¬ ∃ y ( y ∈ e ) ) ∨ ∃ a ∃ b ∃ c ( a ∈ x ∧ b ∈ x ∧ c ∈ a ∧ c ∈ b ∧ ¬ ( a = b ) ) ∨ ∃ c ∀ e ( e ∈ x ⟹ ∃ a ( a ∈ e ∧ a ∈ c ∧ ∀ b ( ( b ∈ e ∧ b ∈ c ) ⟹ a = b ) ) ) ) Note that P ∨ Q ∨ R is logically equivalent to
( ¬ P ∧ ¬ Q ) ⟹ R . In English, this first-order sentence reads:
Given any set X , X contains the empty set as an element or
the elements of X are not pairwise disjoint or
there exists a set C such that its intersection with any of the elements of
X contains exactly one element.
This guarantees for any partition of a set
X the existence of a subset
C of X containing exactly one element from each part of the partition.
Another equivalent axiom only considers collections
X that are essentially powersets of other sets:
For any set A , the power set of A (with the empty set removed) has a choice function.
Authors who use this formulation often speak of the choice function on
A , but this is a slightly different notion of choice function.  Its domain is the power set of
A (with the empty set removed), and so makes sense for any set
A , whereas with the definition used elsewhere in this article, the domain of a choice function on a collection of sets is that collection, and so only makes sense for sets of sets.  With this alternate notion of choice function, the axiom of choice can be compactly stated as
Every set has a choice function.
which is equivalent to
For any set A there is a function f : P ( A ) ∖ { ∅ } → A such that for any non-empty subset
B of A , f ( B ) lies in B . The negation of the axiom can thus be expressed as:
There is a set A such that for all functions
f (on the set of non-empty subsets of
A ), there is a subset B such that f ( B ) does not lie in B . Until the late 19th century, the axiom of choice was often used implicitly, although it had not yet been formally stated. For example, after having established that the set X contains only non-empty sets, a mathematician might have said "let F(s) be one of the members of s for all s in X" to define a function F.  In general, it is impossible to prove that F exists without the axiom of choice, but this seems to have gone unnoticed until Zermelo.
The existence of a choice function for a finite collection of nonempty sets can be proved by the principle of finite induction, without appealing to the axiom of choice. The proof uses the fact that, given a single nonempty set ⁠
A ⁠, first-order logic allows choosing some concrete ⁠
a ∈ A ⁠. However, since a proof in first-order logic must be finite, one cannot make an infinite number of choices with first-order logic alone.
Another case where the axiom of choice is not needed is when there exists an explicit rule that gives a canonical choice function. For example, if each member of the collection ⁠
X ⁠ is a nonempty subset of the natural numbers, then one such explicit rule is to choose the smallest element of each ⁠
A ∈ X ⁠. The canonical choice function that maps each ⁠
A ∈ X ⁠ to its smallest element can again be constructed in ZF without the axiom of choice.
In general, if the union of all sets in ⁠
X ⁠ can be well-ordered, then a choice function for ⁠
X ⁠ can be constructed without using the axiom of choice. Note that it does not suffice that each ⁠
A ∈ X ⁠ can be well-ordered, since the axiom of choice may be needed to choose a canonical well-ordering for each ⁠
A ⁠ anyway. As an example where the axiom of choice is required, let ⁠
X ⁠ be set of all non-empty subsets of the real numbers. Choosing the least element from each set no longer works, because some subsets of the real numbers do not have least elements. For example, the open interval ⁠
( 0 , 1 ) ⁠ does not have a least element: if ⁠
x ⁠ is in ⁠ ( 0 , 1 ) ⁠, then so is ⁠ x / 2 ⁠, and ⁠ x / 2 ⁠ is always strictly smaller than ⁠
x ⁠. This strategy fails here because the natural order of real numbers is not a well-order.
If there exists a different ordering of the real numbers which is a well-ordering, then applying the least-element strategy with respect to that ordering would give a choice function for ⁠
X ⁠. Conversely, if there exists a choice function for ⁠
X ⁠, then the proof of the well-ordering theorem would show that a well-ordering of the real numbers does exist.
Let ⁠ S ⁠ be the unit circle, and ⁠
G ⁠ be the group consisting of all rational rotations (i.e., rotations by angles which are rational multiples of ⁠
π ⁠). Since ⁠ G ⁠ is countable while ⁠
S ⁠ is uncountable, ⁠ S ⁠ must break up into uncountably many orbits under the action of ⁠
G ⁠. Using the axiom of choice, we could pick a single point from each orbit, obtaining an uncountable subset ⁠
X ⁠ of ⁠ S ⁠ with the property that all of its translates by ⁠
G ⁠ are disjoint from ⁠
X ⁠. The set of those translates partitions the circle into a countable collection of pairwise disjoint sets, which are all pairwise congruent. The set ⁠
X ⁠ will be non-measurable for any rotation-invariant countably additive measure on ⁠
S ⁠: if ⁠ X ⁠ has zero measure, countable additivity would imply that the whole circle has zero measure. If ⁠
X ⁠ has positive measure, countable additivity would show that the circle has infinite measure.
Applying a similar construction to the three-dimensional ball can result in a set that is non-measurable even for any rotation-invariant finitely additive measure, as shown by the Banach–Tarski paradox.
A proof requiring the axiom of choice may establish the existence of an object without canonically defining the object in the language of set theory. For example, while the axiom of choice implies that there is a well-ordering of the real numbers, there are models of set theory with the axiom of choice in which no individual well-ordering of the reals is definable. Similarly, although a subset of the real numbers that is not Lebesgue measurable can be proved to exist using the axiom of choice, it is consistent that no such set is definable.
The axiom of choice asserts the existence of these intangibles (objects that are proved to exist, but which cannot be constructed in any canonical way), which may conflict with some philosophical principles. Because there is no canonical well-ordering of all sets, a construction that relies on a well-ordering may not produce a canonical result, even if a canonical result is desired (as is often the case in category theory). This has been used as an argument against the use of the axiom of choice.
Another argument against the axiom of choice is that it implies the existence of objects that may seem counterintuitive. One example is the Banach–Tarski paradox, which says that it is possible to decompose the 3-dimensional solid unit ball into finitely many pieces and, using only rotations and translations, reassemble the pieces into two solid balls each with the same volume as the original. The pieces in this decomposition, constructed using the axiom of choice, are non-measurable sets.
Despite these seemingly paradoxical results, most mathematicians accept the axiom of choice as a valid principle for proving new results in mathematics. But the debate is interesting enough that it is considered notable when a theorem in ZFC (ZF plus AC) is logically equivalent (with just the ZF axioms) to the axiom of choice, and mathematicians look for results that require the axiom of choice to be false, though this type of deduction is less common than the type that requires the axiom of choice to be true.
Theorems of ZF hold true in any model of that theory, regardless of the truth or falsity of the axiom of choice in that particular model. The implications of choice below, including weaker versions of the axiom itself, are listed because they are not theorems of ZF. The Banach–Tarski paradox, for example, is neither provable nor disprovable from ZF alone: it is impossible to construct the required decomposition of the unit ball in ZF, but also impossible to prove there is no such decomposition. Such statements can be rephrased as conditional statements—for example, "If AC holds, then the decomposition in the Banach–Tarski paradox exists." Such conditional statements are provable in ZF when the original statements are provable from ZF and the axiom of choice.
As discussed above, in the classical theory of ZFC, the axiom of choice enables nonconstructive proofs in which the existence of a type of object is proved without an explicit canonical construction of an instance of this type. In fact, in set theory and topos theory, Diaconescu's theorem shows that the axiom of choice implies the law of excluded middle. The principle is thus not available in constructive set theory, where non-classical logic is employed.
The situation is different when the principle is formulated in Martin-Löf type theory. There and higher-order Heyting arithmetic, the appropriate statement of the axiom of choice is (depending on approach) included as an axiom or provable as a theorem. A cause for this difference is that the axiom of choice in type theory does not have the extensionality properties that the axiom of choice in constructive set theory does. The type theoretical context is discussed further below.
Different choice principles have been thoroughly studied in the constructive contexts and the principles' status varies between different school and varieties of the constructive mathematics.
Some results in constructive set theory use the axiom of countable choice or the axiom of dependent choice, which do not imply the law of the excluded middle. Errett Bishop, who is notable for developing a framework for constructive analysis, argued that an axiom of choice was constructively acceptable, saying
A choice function exists in constructive mathematics, because a choice is implied by the very meaning of existence.
Although the axiom of countable choice in particular is commonly used in constructive mathematics, its use has also been questioned.
It has been known since as early as 1922 that the axiom of choice may fail in a variant of ZF with urelements, through the technique of permutation models introduced by Abraham Fraenkel and developed further by Andrzej Mostowski. The basic technique can be illustrated as follows: Let xn and yn be distinct urelements for n=1, 2, 3..., and build a model where each set is symmetric under the interchange xn ↔ yn for all but a finite number of n. Then the set X = {{x1, y1}, {x2, y2}, {x3, y3}, ...} can be in the model but sets such as {x1, x2, x3, ...}  cannot, and thus X cannot have a choice function.
In 1938, Kurt Gödel showed that the negation of the axiom of choice is not a theorem of ZF by constructing an inner model (the constructible universe) that satisfies ZFC, thus showing that ZFC is consistent if ZF itself is consistent. In 1963, Paul Cohen employed the technique of forcing, developed for this purpose, to show that, assuming ZF is consistent, the axiom of choice itself is not a theorem of ZF. He did this by constructing a much more complex model that satisfies ZF¬C (ZF with the negation of AC added as axiom) and thus showing that ZF¬C is consistent. Cohen's model is a symmetric model, which is similar to permutation models, but uses "generic" subsets of the natural numbers (justified by forcing) in place of urelements.
Together these results establish that the axiom of choice is logically independent of ZF. The assumption that ZF is consistent is harmless because adding another axiom to an already inconsistent system cannot make the situation worse. Because of independence, the decision whether to use the axiom of choice (or its negation) in a proof cannot be made by appeal to other axioms of set theory. It must be made on other grounds.
One argument in favor of using the axiom of choice is that it is convenient because it allows one to prove some simplifying propositions that otherwise could not be proved. Many theorems provable using choice are of an elegant general character: the cardinalities of any two sets are comparable, every nontrivial unital ring has a maximal ideal, every vector space has a basis, every connected graph has a spanning tree, and every product of compact spaces is compact, among many others. Frequently, the axiom of choice allows generalizing a theorem to "larger" objects. For example, it is provable without the axiom of choice that every vector space of finite dimension has a basis, but the generalization to all vector spaces requires the axiom of choice. Likewise, a finite product of compact spaces can be proven to be compact without the axiom of choice, but the generalization to infinite products (Tychonoff's theorem) requires the axiom of choice.
The proof of the independence result also shows that a wide class of mathematical statements, including all statements that can be phrased in the language of Peano arithmetic, are provable in ZF if and only if they are provable in ZFC. Statements in this class include the statement that P = NP, the Riemann hypothesis, and many other unsolved mathematical problems. When attempting to solve problems in this class, it makes no difference whether ZF or ZFC is employed if the only question is the existence of a proof. It is possible, however, that there is a shorter proof of a theorem from ZFC than from ZF.
The axiom of choice is not the only significant statement that is independent of ZF. For example, the generalized continuum hypothesis (GCH) is not only independent of ZF, but also independent of ZFC. However, ZF plus GCH implies AC, making GCH a strictly stronger claim than AC, even though they are both independent of ZF.
The axiom of constructibility and the generalized continuum hypothesis each imply the axiom of choice and are strictly stronger than it. In class theories such as Von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel set theory and Morse–Kelley set theory, there is an axiom called the axiom of global choice that is stronger than the axiom of choice for sets because it also applies to proper classes. The axiom of global choice follows from the axiom of limitation of size. Tarski's axiom, which is used in Tarski–Grothendieck set theory and states (in the vernacular) that every set belongs to some Grothendieck universe, is stronger than the axiom of choice.
There are important statements that, assuming the axioms of ZF but neither AC nor ¬AC, are equivalent to the axiom of choice (that is, their truth values in ZF, while undecidable, are the same as that of AC). The most important among them are Zorn's lemma and the well-ordering theorem. In fact, Zermelo initially introduced the axiom of choice in order to formalize his proof of the well-ordering theorem.
Set theory Trichotomy: The cardinalities of any two sets are comparable with each other. That is, given any two sets, an injection exists from (at least) one of the sets to the other.
Tarski's theorem about choice: For every infinite set
A , the sets A and A × A have the same cardinality; i.e., there exists a bijection between them.
Every surjection f : S → T has a right inverse; i.e., there exists a function
g : T → S such that f ∘ g = i d T . For every disjoint collection
C of nonempty sets, there exists a set
C ⊆ ∪ S ∈ C ( S ) that intersects each member of
C in exactly one element. That is, every partition of a set has a transversal.
If a relation R from a set X to a set Y has the property that for every
x ∈ X , there is a y ∈ Y with x R y , then there exists a function
f : X → Y such that x R f ( x ) for all x ∈ X . The Cartesian product of any indexed family of nonempty sets is nonempty. That is, for any set
I , and any I -indexed family ( S i ) i ∈ I of nonempty sets, there exists an
I -indexed set ( s i ) i ∈ I of elements in ∪ i ∈ I ( S i ) such that s i ∈ S i for all i ∈ I . In any collection A of nonempty sets, there exists a disjoint subcollection
C of sets whose union ∪ S ∈ C ( S ) intersects all the members of
A . (Note that such a disjoint subcollection is precisely one that is maximal with respect to set inclusion).
For any set X , there exists a maximal (under set inclusion) collection
A of subsets of X for which every finite subcollection
C of A has a nonempty intersection
∩ S ∈ C ( S ) . (This statement is key to a standard proof of Tychonoff's Theorem).
Well-ordering theorem: Every set
A has a well-ordering (i.e., a total ordering in which every nonempty subset of
A has a minimum element). Consequently, every cardinal has an initial ordinal.
For every ordinal α , the powerset (i.e., the set of all subsets) of
α has a well-ordering. Hausdorff maximal principle: Every partially ordered set has a maximal chain (with respect to inclusion). Equivalently, in a partially ordered set, every chain can be extended to a maximal chain.
Antichain principle: Every partially ordered set has a maximal antichain (with respect to inclusion). Equivalently, in any partially ordered set, every antichain can be extended to a maximal antichain.
Zorn's lemma: If ( A , < ) is any partially ordered set in which every chain has an upper bound in
A , then ( A , < ) has at least one maximal element.
Kuratowski's lemma: If
A is any family of sets with the property that for any subfamily
C of A totally ordered by set inclusion, the union
∪ A ∈ C ( A ) is an element of A , then A has at least one element maximal with respect to inclusion.
Tukey's lemma: If A is any family of subsets of a set
X with the property that a set
B ⊆ X is an element of A iff every finite subset of
B is an element of A , then A has at least one element maximal with respect to inclusion.
König's theorem: Informally, the sum of a sequence of cardinals is strictly less than the product of a sequence of larger cardinals. (The reason for the term "informally" is that the sum or product of a "sequence" of cardinals cannot itself be defined without some aspect of the axiom of choice.)
Abstract algebra Every vector space has a basis; equivalently, every linearly independent subset of a vector space can be extended to a basis, while every spanning subset contains a basis. In the language of module theory, all vector spaces are free modules.
Krull's theorem: Every nontrivial unital ring contains a maximal ideal; equivalently, every proper ideal of a unital ring can be extended to a maximal ideal.
For every non-empty set S there is a binary operation defined on S that gives it a group structure. (A cancellative binary operation is enough, see group structure and the axiom of choice.)
Every free abelian group is projective.
Baer's criterion: Every divisible abelian group is injective.
Every set is a projective object in the category Set of sets.
Functional analysis The closed unit ball of the dual of a normed vector space over the reals has an extreme point.
Point-set topology Tychonoff's theorem: The product of any indexed family of compact topological spaces is compact.
The closure of the product of any indexed family of subsets of a topological space is equal to the product of the closures of those subsets.
Mathematical logic If S is a set of sentences of first-order logic and B is a consistent subset of S, then B is included in a set that is maximal among consistent subsets of S.  The special case where S is the set of all first-order sentences in a given signature is weaker, equivalent to the Boolean prime ideal theorem; see the section "Weaker forms" below.
Lowenheim-Skolem theorem: If first-order theory has infinite model, then it has infinite model of every possible cardinality greater than or equal to the cardinality of the language of this theory.
Graph theory Every connected graph has a spanning tree; equivalently, every tree in a connected graph can be extended to a spanning tree, while every spanning subgraph contains a spanning tree.
Several results in category theory invoke the axiom of choice for their proof. These results might be weaker than, equivalent to, or stronger than the axiom of choice, depending on the strength of the technical foundations. For example, if one defines categories in terms of sets, that is, as sets of objects and morphisms (usually called a small category), then there is no category of all sets, and so it is difficult for a category-theoretic formulation to apply to all sets. On the other hand, other foundational descriptions of category theory are considerably stronger, and an identical category-theoretic statement of choice may be stronger than the standard formulation, à la class theory, mentioned above.
Examples of category-theoretic statements which require choice include:
Every small category has a skeleton.
If two small categories are weakly equivalent, then they are equivalent.
Every continuous functor on a small-complete category which satisfies the appropriate solution set condition has a left-adjoint (the Freyd adjoint functor theorem).
There are several weaker statements unprovable in ZF that are logically implied by the axiom of choice (AC) within ZF but are not equivalent to AC. One example is the axiom of dependent choice (DC). A still weaker example is the axiom of countable choice (ACω or CC), which states that a choice function exists for any countable family of nonempty sets. These axioms are sufficient for many proofs in elementary mathematical analysis, and are consistent with some principles, such as the Lebesgue measurability of all subsets of real numbers, that are disprovable from the full axiom of choice.
Given an ordinal parameter α ≥ ω+2 — for every set S with rank less than α, S is well-orderable. Given an ordinal parameter α ≥ 1 — for every set S with Hartogs number less than ωα, S is well-orderable. As the ordinal parameter is increased, these approximate the full axiom of choice more and more closely.
Other choice axioms weaker than axiom of choice include the Boolean prime ideal theorem and the axiom of uniformization.  The former is equivalent in ZF to Tarski's 1930 ultrafilter lemma: every filter is a subset of some ultrafilter.
One of the most interesting aspects of the axiom of choice is the large number of places in mathematics where it shows up. Here are some statements that require the axiom of choice in the sense that they are not provable from ZF but are provable from ZFC (ZF plus AC). Equivalently, these statements are true in all models of ZFC but false in some models of ZF.
Set theory Axiom of countable choice: The Cartesian product of any sequence (i.e., countable indexed family) of nonempty sets is nonempty. (This is just the axiom of choice with the indexing set restricted to countable size).
Axiom of dependent choice: If
R is any relation on a set
S with the property that for every
x ∈ S , there is a y ∈ S with x R y , then, for every x ∈ S , there exists a sequence
( x n ) n ∈ N in S starting at x and satisfying x n R x n + 1 for all n ∈ N . (In ZF, this statement logically implies the axiom of countable choice, and is strictly stronger.)
Axiom of Choice for finite sets: The Cartesian product of any indexed family of non-empty finite sets is nonempty. (Note that here, it is each member of the indexed family that is restricted in size, not the indexing set, in contrast with countable choice).
Ultrafilter lemma: Every filter on a set
S can be extended to an ultrafilter on
S . (In ZF, this statement logically implies the Axiom of choice for finite sets (above)).
The union of any countable family of countable sets is countable. (In ZF, this statement is logically implied by the axiom of countable choice).
Every infinite set has a countable-infinite subset, i.e., has cardinality greater than or equal to
ℵ 0 . (In ZF, this statement is logically implied by the axiom of countable choice but is not equivalent; see Dedekind infinite).
Eight definitions of a finite set are equivalent.
Every infinite game G S in which S is a Borel subset of Baire space is determined.
Every infinite cardinal
κ satisfies 2 κ = κ . Measure theory The Vitali theorem: There exist subsets of
R n (for any n > 0 ) that are not Lebesgue measurable; i.e., the set of all subsets of
R n does not form a measure space of
R n under the standard (Lebesgue) outer-measure.
There exist Lebesgue-measurable subsets of
R n that are not Borel sets; i.e., the Borel
σ -algebra on R n is strictly contained in the Lebesgue-measure
σ -algebra on R n . The Hausdorff paradox.
The Banach–Tarski paradox.
Abstract algebra Every field has an algebraic closure.
Every field extension has a transcendence basis.
Every infinite-dimensional vector space contains an infinite linearly independent subset (In ZF, this statement is logically implied by the axiom of countable choice).
Stone's representation theorem for Boolean algebras needs the Boolean prime ideal theorem.
The Nielsen–Schreier theorem, that every subgroup of a free group is free.
The additive groups of R and C are isomorphic.
Metric spaces In any metric space X , the topological and sequential definitions of an accumulation point of a subset
S are equivalent. (In the topological definition,
x is an accumulation point of
S iff every neighborhood of
x in X intersects S − { x } , while in the sequential definition,
x is an accumulation point of
S iff there exists a sequence in
S − { x } that converges to x in X ). This equivalence as well as the two below equivalences require the axiom of countable choice, but not the full axiom of choice.
For functions between metric spaces, the topological and sequential definitions of continuity are equivalent. (In the topological definition, a function
f : X → Y is continuous at x iff for every neighborhood
V of f ( x ) in Y , there is a neighborhood
U of x in X such that f ( U ) ⊆ V . In the sequential definition, a function
f : X → Y is continuous at x iff for every sequence
{ x n } n ≥ 1 in X converging to x , the sequence { f ( x n ) } n ≥ 1 converges to f ( x ) in Y ). For metric spaces, the topological and sequential definitions of compactness are equivalent. (In the topological definition,
X is compact iff every collection of open subsets of
X that covers X has a finite subcollection which also covers
X . In the sequential definition,
X is compact iff every sequence in
X has a subsequence that converges in
X ). Functional analysis The Hahn–Banach theorem in functional analysis, allowing the extension of linear functionals.
The theorem that every Hilbert space has an orthonormal basis.
The Banach–Alaoglu theorem about compactness of sets of functionals.
The Baire category theorem about complete metric spaces, and its consequences, such as the open mapping theorem and the closed graph theorem.
On every infinite-dimensional topological vector space there is a discontinuous linear map.
General topology A uniform space is compact if and only if it is complete and totally bounded.
Every Tychonoff space has a Stone–Čech compactification.
Urysohn's Lemma: For any two disjoint closed subsets
A and B of a normal space X , and any compact interval
[ a , b ] of R , there exists a continuous map
f : X → [ a , b ] such that f ( A ) = { a } and f ( B ) = { b } . (In ZF, this statement is logically implied by the axiom of dependent choice, but not by the axiom of countable choice).
Tietze Extension Theorem: For any closed subspace
A of a normal space X , and any closed or open interval
I of R , and any continuous map
f : A → I , there exists a continuous map from
X to I that extends f . (In ZF, this statement is logically equivalent with Urysohn's Lemma).
Existence of partitions of unity: For any paracompact Hausdorff space
X (in particular, any manifold), and any indexed open cover
( U i ) i ∈ I of X , there exists a partition of unity of
X subordinate to ( U i ) i ∈ I . Mathematical logic Gödel's completeness theorem for first-order logic: every consistent set of first-order sentences has a completion. That is, every consistent set of first-order sentences can be extended to a maximal consistent set.
The compactness theorem: If
Σ is a set of first-order (or alternatively, zero-order) sentences such that every finite subset of
Σ has a model, then Σ has a model. There are several historically important set-theoretic statements implied by AC whose equivalence to AC is open. Zermelo cited the partition principle, which was formulated before AC itself, as a justification for believing AC. In 1906, Russell declared PP to be equivalent, but whether the partition principle implies AC is an old open problem in set theory, and the equivalences of the other statements are similarly hard old open problems. In every known model of ZF where choice fails, these statements fail too, but it is unknown whether they can hold without choice.
Set theory Partition principle: Given two sets A and B, if a surjection exists from A to B, then an injection exists from B to A. Equivalently, every partition P of a set S is less than or equal to S in size.
Given any two sets A and B where B is nonempty, either an injection or a surjection (or both) exists from A to B.
Given any two nonempty sets, a surjection exists from (at least) one of the sets to the other.
Converse Schröder–Bernstein theorem: If two sets have surjections to each other, then they have the same cardinality.
Weak partition principle: Given two sets A and B, if both an injection and a surjection exists from A to B, then A and B have the same cardinality. Equivalently, a partition of a set S cannot be strictly larger than S. If WPP holds, this already implies the existence of a non-measurable set. Each of the previous three statements is implied by the preceding one, but it is unknown if any of these implications can be reversed.
There is no infinite decreasing sequence of cardinals. The equivalence was conjectured by Schoenflies in 1905.
Abstract algebra Hahn embedding theorem: Every ordered abelian group G order-embeds as a subgroup of the additive group
R Ω endowed with a lexicographical order, where Ω is the set of Archimedean equivalence classes of G. This equivalence was conjectured by Hahn in 1907.
If we abbreviate by BP the claim that every set of real numbers has the property of Baire, then BP is stronger than ¬AC, which asserts the nonexistence of any choice function on perhaps only a single set of nonempty sets. Strengthened negations may be compatible with weakened forms of AC. For example, ZF + DC + BP is consistent, if ZF is.
It is also consistent with ZF + DC that every set of reals is Lebesgue measurable, but this consistency result, due to Robert M. Solovay, cannot be proved in ZFC itself, but requires a mild large cardinal assumption (the existence of an inaccessible cardinal). The much stronger axiom of determinacy, or AD, implies that every set of reals is Lebesgue measurable, has the property of Baire, and has the perfect set property (all three of these results are refuted by AC itself). ZF + DC + AD is consistent provided that a sufficiently strong large cardinal axiom is consistent (the existence of infinitely many Woodin cardinals).
Quine's system of axiomatic set theory, New Foundations (NF), takes its name from the title ("New Foundations for Mathematical Logic") of the 1937 article that introduced it. In the NF axiomatic system, the axiom of choice can be disproved.
There are models of Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory in which the axiom of choice is false. We shall abbreviate "Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory plus the negation of the axiom of choice" by ZF¬C. For certain models of ZF¬C, it is possible to validate the negation of some standard ZFC theorems. As any model of ZF¬C is also a model of ZF, it is the case that for each of the following statements, there exists a model of ZF in which that statement is true.
The negation of the weak partition principle: There is a set that can be partitioned into strictly more equivalence classes than the original set has elements, and a function whose domain is strictly smaller than its range. In fact, this is the case in all known models.
There is a function f from the real numbers to the real numbers such that f is not continuous at a, but f is sequentially continuous at a, i.e., for any sequence {xn} converging to a, limn f(xn)=f(a).
There is an infinite set of real numbers without a countably infinite subset.
The real numbers are a countable union of countable sets. This does not imply that the real numbers are countable: As pointed out above, to show that a countable union of countable sets is itself countable requires the Axiom of countable choice.
There is a field with no algebraic closure.
There is a field with two non-isomorphic algebraic closures.
In all models of ZF¬C there is a vector space with no basis.
There is a vector space with two bases of different cardinalities.
There is a free complete Boolean algebra on countably many generators.
There is a set that cannot be linearly ordered.
There exists a model of ZF¬C in which every set in Rn is measurable.  Thus it is possible to exclude counterintuitive results like the Banach–Tarski paradox which are provable in ZFC.  Furthermore, this is possible whilst assuming the Axiom of dependent choice, which is weaker than AC but sufficient to develop most of real analysis.
In all models of ZF¬C, the generalized continuum hypothesis does not hold.
Additionally, by imposing definability conditions on sets (in the sense of descriptive set theory) one can often prove restricted versions of the axiom of choice from axioms incompatible with general choice.  This appears, for example, in the Moschovakis coding lemma.
In type theory, a different kind of statement is known as the axiom of choice. This form begins with two types, σ and τ, and a relation R between objects of type σ and objects of type τ. The axiom of choice states that if for each x of type σ there exists a y of type τ such that R(x,y), then there is a function f from objects of type σ to objects of type τ such that R(x,f(x)) holds for all x of type σ:
( ∀ x σ ) ( ∃ y τ ) R ( x , y ) → ( ∃ f σ → τ ) ( ∀ x σ ) R ( x , f ( x ) ) . Unlike in set theory, the axiom of choice in type theory is typically stated as an axiom scheme, in which R varies over all formulas or over all formulas of a particular logical form.
